

THE RAPE OF LUCRECE



TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY WRIOTHESLY,
Earl of Southampton, and Baron of Tichfield.



Your lordship's in all duty,
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.

The Rape of Lucrece

The Argument


FROM the besieged Ardea all in post,
Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,
Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,
And to Collatium bears the lightless fire
Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire
And girdle with embracing flames the waist
Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste.


Haply that name of 'chaste' unhappily set
This bateless edge on his keen appetite;
When Collatine unwisely did not let
To praise the clear unmatched red and white
Which triumph'd in that sky of his delight,
Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties,
With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.


For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent,
Unlock'd the treasure of his happy state;
What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent
In the possession of his beauteous mate;
Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate,
That kings might be espoused to more fame,
But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.


O happiness enjoy'd but of a few!
And, if possess'd, as soon decay'd and done
As is the morning's silver-melting dew
Against the golden splendor of the sun!
An expired date, cancell'd ere well begun:
Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms,
Are weakly fortress'd from a world of harms.


Beauty itself doth of itself persuade
The eyes of men without an orator;
What needeth then apologies be made,
To set forth that which is so singular?
Or why is Collatine the publisher
Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown
From thievish ears, because it is his own?


Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sovereignty
Suggested this proud issue of a king;
For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be:
Perchance that envy of so rich a thing,
Braving compare, disdainfully did sting
His high-pitch'd thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt
That golden hap which their superiors want.


But some untimely thought did instigate
His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those:
His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state,
Neglected all, with swift intent he goes
To quench the coal which in his liver glows.
O rash false heat, wrapp'd in repentant cold,
Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old!


When at Collatium this false lord arrived,
Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame,
Within whose face beauty and virtue strived
Which of them both should underprop her fame:
When virtue bragg'd, beauty would blush for shame;
When beauty boasted blushes, in despite
Virtue would stain that o'er with silver white.


But beauty, in that white intituled,
From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field:
Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red,
Which virtue gave the golden age to gild
Their silver cheeks, and call'd it then their shield;
Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,
When shame assail'd, the red should fence the white.


This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen,
Argued by beauty's red and virtue's white
Of either's colour was the other queen,
Proving from world's minority their right:
Yet their ambition makes them still to fight;
The sovereignty of either being so great,
That oft they interchange each other's seat.


Their silent war of lilies and of roses,
Which Tarquin view'd in her fair face's field,
In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses;
Where, lest between them both it should be kill'd,
The coward captive vanquished doth yield
To those two armies that would let him go,
Rather than triumph in so false a foe.


Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue,--
The niggard prodigal that praised her so,--
In that high task hath done her beauty wrong,
Which far exceeds his barren skill to show:
Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe
Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise,
In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.


This earthly saint, adored by this devil,
Little suspecteth the false worshipper;
For unstain'd thoughts do seldom dream on evil;
Birds never limed no secret bushes fear:
So guiltless she securely gives good cheer
And reverend welcome to her princely guest,
Whose inward ill no outward harm express'd:


For that he colour'd with his high estate,
Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty;
That nothing in him seem'd inordinate,
Save something too much wonder of his eye,
Which, having all, all could not satisfy;
But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store,
That, cloy'd with much, he pineth still for more.


But she, that never coped with stranger eyes,
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,
Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies
Writ in the glassy margents of such books:
She touch'd no unknown baits, nor fear'd no hooks;
Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,
More than his eyes were open'd to the light.


He stories to her ears her husband's fame,
Won in the fields of fruitful Italy;
And decks with praises Collatine's high name,
Made glorious by his manly chivalry
With bruised arms and wreaths of victory:
Her joy with heaved-up hand she doth express,
And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success.


Far from the purpose of his coming hither,
He makes excuses for his being there:
No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather
Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear;
Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear,
Upon the world dim darkness doth display,
And in her vaulty prison stows the Day.


For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,
Intending weariness with heavy spright;
For, after supper, long he questioned
With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night:
Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight;
And every one to rest themselves betake,
Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake.


As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving
The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining;
Yet ever to obtain his will resolving,
Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining:
Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining;
And when great treasure is the meed proposed,
Though death be adjunct, there's no death supposed.


Those that much covet are with gain so fond,
For what they have not, that which they possess
They scatter and unloose it from their bond,
And so, by hoping more, they have but less;
Or, gaining more, the profit of excess
Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain.


The aim of all is but to nurse the life
With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;
And in this aim there is such thwarting strife,
That one for all, or all for one we gage;
As life for honour in fell battle's rage;
Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost
The death of all, and all together lost.


So that in venturing ill we leave to be
The things we are for that which we expect;
And this ambitious foul infirmity,
In having much, torments us with defect
Of that we have: so then we do neglect
The thing we have; and, all for want of wit,
Make something nothing by augmenting it.


Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,
Pawning his honour to obtain his lust;
And for himself himself be must forsake:
Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust?
When shall he think to find a stranger just,
When he himself himself confounds, betrays
To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days?


Now stole upon the time the dead of night,
When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes:
No comfortable star did lend his light,
No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries;
Now serves the season that they may surprise
The silly lambs: pure thoughts are dead and still,
While lust and murder wake to stain and kill.


And now this lustful lord leap'd from his bed,
Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm;
Is madly toss'd between desire and dread;
Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm;
But honest fear, bewitch'd with lust's foul charm,
Doth too too oft betake him to retire,
Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire.


His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth,
That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly;
Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,
Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye;
And to the flame thus speaks advisedly,
'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire,
So Lucrece must I force to my desire.'


Here pale with fear he doth premeditate
The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,
And in his inward mind he doth debate
What following sorrow may on this arise:
Then looking scornfully, he doth despise
His naked armour of still-slaughter'd lust,
And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:


'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not
To darken her whose light excelleth thine:
And die, unhallow'd thoughts, before you blot
With your uncleanness that which is divine;
Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine:
Let fair humanity abhor the deed
That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed.


'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms!
O foul dishonour to my household's grave!
O impious act, including all foul harms!
A martial man to be soft fancy's slave!
True valour still a true respect should have;
Then my digression is so vile, so base,
That it will live engraven in my face.


'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive,
And be an eye-sore in my golden coat;
Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive,
To cipher me how fondly I did dote;
That my posterity, shamed with the note
Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin
To wish that I their father had not bin.


'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.
Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week?
Or sells eternity to get a toy?
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,
Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?


'If Collatinus dream of my intent,
Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage
Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?
This siege that hath engirt his marriage,
This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,
This dying virtue, this surviving shame,
Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame?


'O, what excuse can my invention make,
When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed?
Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake,
Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed?
The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed;
And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
But coward-like with trembling terror die.




'Had Collatinus kill'd my son or sire,
Or lain in ambush to betray my life,
Or were he not my dear friend, this desire
Might have excuse to work upon his wife,
As in revenge or quittal of such strife:
But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,
The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.


'Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known:
Hateful it is; there is no hate in loving:
I'll beg her love; but she is own:
The worst is but denial and reproving:
My will is strong, past reason's weak removing.
Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw
Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.'


Thus, graceless, holds he disputation
'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will,
And with good thoughts make dispensation,
Urging the worser sense for vantage still;
Which in a moment doth confound and kill
All pure effects, and doth so far proceed,
That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.


Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand,
And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes,
Fearing some hard news from the warlike band,
Where her beloved Collatinus lies.
O, how her fear did make her colour rise!
First red as roses that on lawn we lay,
Then white as lawn, the roses took away.


'And how her hand, in my hand being lock'd
Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear!
Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock'd,
Until her husband's welfare she did hear;
Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer,
That had Narcissus seen her as she stood,
Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood.


'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses?
All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth;
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses;
Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth:
Affection is my captain, and he leadeth;
And when his gaudy banner is display'd,
The coward fights and will not be dismay'd.


'Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die!
Respect and reason, wait on wrinkled age!
My heart shall never countermand mine eye:
Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage;
My part is youth, and beats these from the stage:
Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize;
Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?'


As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear
Is almost choked by unresisted lust.
Away he steals with open listening ear,
Full of foul hope and full of fond mistrust;
Both which, as servitors to the unjust,
So cross him with their opposite persuasion,
That now he vows a league, and now invasion.


Within his thought her heavenly image sits,
And in the self-same seat sits Collatine:
That eye which looks on her confounds his wits;
That eye which him beholds, as more divine,
Unto a view so false will not incline;
But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,
Which once corrupted takes the worser part;


And therein heartens up his servile powers,
Who, flatter'd by their leader's jocund show,
Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours;
And as their captain, so their pride doth grow,
Paying more slavish tribute than they owe.
By reprobate desire thus madly led,
The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed.


The locks between her chamber and his will,
Each one by him enforced, retires his ward;
But, as they open, they all rate his ill,
Which drives the creeping thief to some regard:
The threshold grates the door to have him heard;
Night-wandering weasels shriek to see him there;
They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.


As each unwilling portal yields him way,
Through little vents and crannies of the place
The wind wars with his torch to make him stay,
And blows the smoke of it into his face,
Extinguishing his conduct in this case;
But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch,
Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch:


And being lighted, by the light he spies
Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks:
He takes it from the rushes where it lies,
And griping it, the needle his finger pricks;
As who should say 'This glove to wanton tricks
Is not inured; return again in haste;
Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste.'


But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him;
He in the worst sense construes their denial:
The doors, the wind, the glove, that did delay him,
He takes for accidental things of trial;
Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,
Who with a lingering slay his course doth let,
Till every minute pays the hour his debt.


'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time,
Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring,
To add a more rejoicing to the prime,
And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing.
Pain pays the income of each precious thing;
Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands,
The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.'


Now is he come unto the chamber-door,
That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,
Which with a yielding latch, and with no more,
Hath barr'd him from the blessed thing be sought.
So from himself impiety hath wrought,
That for his prey to pray he doth begin,
As if the heavens should countenance his sin.


But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer,
Having solicited th' eternal power
That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair,
And they would stand auspicious to the hour,
Even there he starts: quoth he, 'I must deflower:
The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact,
How can they then assist me in the act?


'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide!
My will is back'd with resolution:
Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried;
The blackest sin is clear'd with absolution;
Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution.
The eye of heaven is out, and misty night
Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.'


This said, his guilty hand pluck'd up the latch,
And with his knee the door he opens wide.
The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch:
Thus treason works ere traitors be espied.
Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;
But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,
Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.


Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,
And gazeth on her yet unstained bed.
The curtains being close, about he walks,
Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head:
By their high treason is his heart misled;
Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon
To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.


Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun,
Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight;
Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun
To wink, being blinded with a greater light:
Whether it is that she reflects so bright,
That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed;
But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.


O, had they in that darksome prison died!
Then had they seen the period of their ill;
Then Collatine again, by Lucrece' side,
In his clear bed might have reposed still:
But they must ope, this blessed league to kill;
And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight
Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight.


Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Between whose hills her head entombed is:
Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies,
To be admired of lewd unhallow'd eyes.


Without the bed her other fair hand was,
On the green coverlet; whose perfect white
Show'd like an April daisy on the grass,
With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night.
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,
And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,
Till they might open to adorn the day.


Her hair, like golden threads, play'd with her breath;
O modest wantons! wanton modesty!
Showing life's triumph in the map of death,
And death's dim look in life's mortality:
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,
As if between them twain there were no strife,
But that life lived in death, and death in life.


Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue,
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
And him by oath they truly honoured.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred;
Who, like a foul ursurper, went about
From this fair throne to heave the owner out.


What could he see but mightily he noted?
What did he note but strongly he desired?
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
And in his will his wilful eye he tired.
With more than admiration he admired
Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.


As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey,
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
His rage of lust by gazing qualified;
Slack'd, not suppress'd; for standing by her side,
His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins:


And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting,
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting,
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting:
Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.


His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
Smoking with pride, march'd on to make his stand
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land;
Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
Left there round turrets destitute and pale.


They, mustering to the quiet cabinet
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,
And fright her with confusion of their cries:
She, much amazed, breaks ope her lock'd-up eyes,
Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
Are by his flaming torch dimm'd and controll'd.


Imagine her as one in dead of night
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking;
What terror or 'tis! but she, in worser taking,
From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view
The sight which makes supposed terror true.


Wrapp'd and confounded in a thousand fears,
Like to a new-kill'd bird she trembling lies;
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes:
Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries;
Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.


His hand, that yet remains upon her breast,--
Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!--
May feel her heart-poor citizen!--distress'd,
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,
To make the breach and enter this sweet city.


First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin
To sound a parley to his heartless foe;
Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin,
The reason of this rash alarm to know,
Which he by dumb demeanor seeks to show;
But she with vehement prayers urgeth still
Under what colour he commits this ill.


Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face,
That even for anger makes the lily pale,
And the red rose blush at her own disgrace,
Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale:
Under that colour am I come to scale
Thy never-conquer'd fort: the fault is thine,
For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.


'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide:
Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night,
Where thou with patience must my will abide;
My will that marks thee for my earth's delight,
Which I to conquer sought with all my might;
But as reproof and reason beat it dead,
By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.


'I see what crosses my attempt will bring;
I know what thorns the growing rose defends;
I think the honey guarded with a sting;
All this beforehand counsel comprehends:
But will is deaf and hears no heedful friends;
Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty,
And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty.


'I have debated, even in my soul,
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed;
But nothing can affection's course control,
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed.
I know repentant tears ensue the deed,
Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity;
Yet strive I to embrace mine infamy.'


This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,
Which, like a falcon towering in the skies,
Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade,
Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies:
So under his insulting falchion lies
Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells
With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon's bells.


'Lucrece,' quoth he,'this night I must enjoy thee:
If thou deny, then force must work my way,
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee:
That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay,
To kill thine honour with thy life's decay;
And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,
Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.


'So thy surviving husband shall remain
The scornful mark of every open eye;
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,
Thy issue blurr'd with nameless bastardy:
And thou, the author of their obloquy,
Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes,
And sung by children in succeeding times.


'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend:
The fault unknown is as a thought unacted;
A little harm done to a great good end
For lawful policy remains enacted.
The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted
In a pure compound; being so applied,
His venom in effect is purified.


'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake,
Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot
The shame that from them no device can take,
The blemish that will never be forgot;
Worse than a slavish wipe or birth-hour's blot:
For marks descried in men's nativity
Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.'


Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye
He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;
While she, the picture of pure piety,
Like a white hind under the gripe's sharp claws,
Pleads, in a wilderness where are no laws,
To the rough beast that knows no gentle right,
Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.


But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat,
In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding,
From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get,
Which blows these pitchy vapours from their bidding,
Hindering their present fall by this dividing;
So his unhallow'd haste her words delays,
And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.


Yet, foul night-waking cat, he doth but dally,
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth:
Her sad behavior feeds his vulture folly,
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth:
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth
No penetrable entrance to her plaining:
Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.


Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fix'd
In the remorseless wrinkles of his face;
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mix'd,
Which to her oratory adds more grace.
She puts the period often from his place;
And midst the sentence so her accent breaks,
That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.


She conjures him by high almighty Jove,
By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath,
By her untimely tears, her husband's love,
By holy human law, and common troth,
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,
That to his borrow'd bed he make retire,
And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.


Quoth she, 'Reward not hospitality
With such black payment as thou hast pretended;
Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee;
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended;
End thy ill aim before thy shoot be ended;
He is no woodman that doth bend his bow
To strike a poor unseasonable doe.


'My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me:
Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me:
Myself a weakling; do not then ensnare me:
Thou look'st not like deceit; do not deceive me.
My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee:
If ever man were moved with woman moans,
Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans:


'All which together, like a troubled ocean,
Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart,
To soften it with their continual motion;
For stones dissolved to water do convert.
O, if no harder than a stone thou art,
Melt at my tears, and be compassionate!
Soft pity enters at an iron gate.


'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee:
Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame?
To all the host of heaven I complain me,
Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name.
Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same,
Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king;
For kings like gods should govern everything.


'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age,
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring!
If in thy hope thou darest do such outrage,
What darest thou not when once thou art a king?
O, be remember'd, no outrageous thing
From vassal actors can be wiped away;
Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.


'This deed will make thee only loved for fear;
But happy monarchs still are fear'd for love:
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,
When they in thee the like offences prove:
If but for fear of this, thy will remove;
For princes are the glass, the school, the book,
Where subjects' eyes do learn, do read, do look.


'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn?
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame?
Wilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern
Authority for sin, warrant for blame,
To privilege dishonour in thy name?
Thou black'st reproach against long-living laud,
And makest fair reputation but a bawd.


'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee,
From a pure heart command thy rebel will:
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill.
Thy princely office how canst thou fulfil,
When, pattern'd by thy fault, foul sin may say,
He learn'd to sin, and thou didst teach the way?


'Think but how vile a spectacle it were,
To view thy present trespass in another.
Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear;
Their own transgressions partially they smother:
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.
O, how are they wrapp'd in with infamies
That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes!


'To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal,
Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier:
I sue for exiled majesty's repeal;
Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire:
His true respect will prison false desire,
And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne,
That thou shalt see thy state and pity mine.'


'Have done,' quoth he: 'my uncontrolled tide
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let.
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,
And with the wind in greater fury fret:
The petty streams that pay a daily debt
To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste
Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.'


'Thou art,' quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king;
And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood
Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning,
Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.
If all these pretty ills shall change thy good,
Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hearsed,
And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.


'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave;
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified;
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave:
Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride:
The lesser thing should not the greater hide;
The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot,
But low shrubs wither at the cedar's root.


'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state'--
No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee:
Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate,
Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee;
That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee
Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,
To be thy partner in this shameful doom.'


This said, he sets his foot upon the light,
For light and lust are deadly enemies:
Shame folded up in blind concealing night,
When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize.
The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries;
Till with her own white fleece her voice controll'd
Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold:


For with the nightly linen that she wears
He pens her piteous clamours in her head;
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.
O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed!
The spots whereof could weeping purify,
Her tears should drop on them perpetually.


But she hath lost a dearer thing than life,
And he hath won what he would lose again:
This forced league doth force a further strife;
This momentary joy breeds months of pain;
This hot desire converts to cold disdain:
Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,
And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.


Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk,
Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,
Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk
The prey wherein by nature they delight;
So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night:
His taste delicious, in digestion souring,
Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring.


O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit
Can comprehend in still imagination!
Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt,
Ere he can see his own abomination.
While Lust is in his pride, no exclamation
Can curb his heat or rein his rash desire,
Till like a jade Self-will himself doth tire.


And then with lank and lean discolour'd cheek,
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace,
Feeble Desire, all recreant, poor, and meek,
Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case:
The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace,
For there it revels; and when that decays,
The guilty rebel for remission prays.


So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome,
Who this accomplishment so hotly chased;
For now against himself he sounds this doom,
That through the length of times he stands disgraced:
Besides, his soul's fair temple is defaced;
To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,
To ask the spotted princess how she fares.


She says, her subjects with foul insurrection
Have batter'd down her consecrated wall,
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection
Her immortality, and made her thrall
To living death and pain perpetual:
Which in her prescience she controlled still,
But her foresight could not forestall their will.


Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth,
A captive victor that hath lost in gain;
Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,
The scar that will, despite of cure, remain;
Leaving his spoil perplex'd in greater pain.
She bears the load of lust he left behind,
And he the burden of a guilty mind.


He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence;
She like a wearied lamb lies panting there;
He scowls and hates himself for his offence;
She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear;
He faintly flies, sneaking with guilty fear;
She stays, exclaiming on the direful night;
He runs, and chides his vanish'd, loathed delight.


He thence departs a heavy convertite;
She there remains a hopeless castaway;
He in his speed looks for the morning light;
She prays she never may behold the day,
'For day,' quoth she, 'nights scapes doth open lay,
And my true eyes have never practised how
To cloak offences with a cunning brow.


'They think not but that every eye can see
The same disgrace which they themselves behold;
And therefore would they still in darkness be,
To have their unseen sin remain untold;
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
And grave, like water that doth eat in steel,
Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.'


Here she exclaims against repose and rest,
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind.
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find
Some purer chest to close so pure a mind.
Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite
Against the unseen secrecy of night:


'O comfort-killing Night, image of hell!
Dim register and notary of shame!
Black stage for tragedies and murders fell!
Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame!
Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame!
Grim cave of death! whispering conspirator
With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!


'O hateful, vaporous, and foggy Night!
Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime,
Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light,
Make war against proportion'd course of time;
Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb
His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.


'With rotten damps ravish the morning air;
Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick
The life of purity, the supreme fair,
Ere he arrive his weary noon-tide prick;
And let thy misty vapours march so thick,
That in their smoky ranks his smother'd light
May set at noon and make perpetual night.


'Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night's child,
The silver-shining queen he would distain;
Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled,
Through Night's black bosom should not peep again:
So should I have co-partners in my pain;
And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage,
As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage.


'Where now I have no one to blush with me,
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,
To mask their brows and hide their infamy;
But I alone alone must sit and pine,
Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,
Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans,
Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.


'O Night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke,
Let not the jealous Day behold that face
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak
Immodestly lies martyr'd with disgrace!
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,
That all the faults which in thy reign are made
May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade!


'Make me not object to the tell-tale Day!
The light will show, character'd in my brow,
The story of sweet chastity's decay,
The impious breach of holy wedlock vow:
Yea the illiterate, that know not how
To cipher what is writ in learned books,
Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.


'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story,
And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name;
The orator, to deck his oratory,
Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame;
Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame,
Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine.


'Let my good name, that senseless reputation,
For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted:
If that be made a theme for disputation,
The branches of another root are rotted,
And undeserved reproach to him allotted
That is as clear from this attaint of mine
As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine.


'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace!
O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar!
Reproach is stamp'd in Collatinus' face,
And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar,
How he in peace is wounded, not in war.
Alas, how many bear such shameful blows,
Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!


'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me,
From me by strong assault it is bereft.
My honour lost, and I, a drone-like bee,
Have no perfection of my summer left,
But robb'd and ransack'd by injurious theft:
In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept,
And suck'd the honey which thy chaste bee kept.


'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack;
Yet for thy honour did I entertain him;
Coming from thee, I could not put him back,
For it had been dishonour to disdain him:
Besides, of weariness he did complain him,
And talk'd of virtue: O unlook'd-for evil,
When virtue is profaned in such a devil!


'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?
Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests?
Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud?
Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts?
Or kings be breakers of their own behests?
But no perfection is so absolute,
That some impurity doth not pollute.


'The aged man that coffers-up his gold
Is plagued with cramps and gouts and painful fits;
And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold,
But like still-pining Tantalus he sits,
And useless barns the harvest of his wits;
Having no other pleasure of his gain
But torment that it cannot cure his pain.


'So then he hath it when he cannot use it,
And leaves it to be master'd by his young;
Who in their pride do presently abuse it:
Their father was too weak, and they too strong,
To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long.
The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours
Even in the moment that we call them ours.


'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring;
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers;
The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing;
What virtue breeds iniquity devours:
We have no good that we can say is ours,
But ill-annexed Opportunity
Or kills his life or else his quality.


'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great!
'Tis thou that executest the traitor's treason:
Thou set'st the wolf where he the lamb may get;
Whoever plots the sin, thou 'point'st the season;
'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason;
And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.


'Thou makest the vestal violate her oath;
Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thaw'd;
Thou smother'st honesty, thou murder'st troth;
Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd!
Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud:
Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,
Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief!


'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame,
Thy private feasting to a public fast,
Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name,
Thy sugar'd tongue to bitter wormwood taste:
Thy violent vanities can never last.
How comes it then, vile Opportunity,
Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?


'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend,
And bring him where his suit may be obtain'd?
When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end?
Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain'd?
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain'd?
The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
But they ne'er meet with Opportunity.


'The patient dies while the physician sleeps;
The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds;
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps;
Advice is sporting while infection breeds:
Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds:
Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages,
Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.


'When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee,
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid:
They buy thy help; but Sin ne'er gives a fee,
He gratis comes; and thou art well appaid
As well to hear as grant what he hath said.
My Collatine would else have come to me
When Tarquin did, but he was stay'd by thee.


Guilty thou art of murder and of theft,
Guilty of perjury and subornation,
Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift,
Guilty of incest, that abomination;
An accessary by thine inclination
To all sins past, and all that are to come,
From the creation to the general doom.


'Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night,
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare;
Thou nursest all and murder'st all that are:
O, hear me then, injurious, shifting Time!
Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.


'Why hath thy servant, Opportunity,
Betray'd the hours thou gavest me to repose,
Cancell'd my fortunes, and enchained me
To endless date of never-ending woes?
Time's office is to fine the hate of foes;
To eat up errors by opinion bred,
Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.


'Time's glory is to calm contending kings,
To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light,
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
To wake the morn and sentinel the night,
To wrong the wronger till he render right,
To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours,
And smear with dust their glittering golden towers;


'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments,
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
To blot old books and alter their contents,
To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings,
To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs,
To spoil antiquities of hammer'd steel,
And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel;


'To show the beldam daughters of her daughter,
To make the child a man, the man a child,
To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter,
To tame the unicorn and lion wild,
To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled,
To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops,
And waste huge stones with little water drops.


'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,
Unless thou couldst return to make amends?
One poor retiring minute in an age
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,
Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends:
O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back,
I could prevent this storm and shun thy wrack!


'Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity,
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight:
Devise extremes beyond extremity,
To make him curse this cursed crimeful night:
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright;
And the dire thought of his committed evil
Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.


'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances,
Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans;
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,
To make him moan; but pity not his moans:
Stone him with harden'd hearts harder than stones;
And let mild women to him lose their mildness,
Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.


'Let him have time to tear his curled hair,
Let him have time against himself to rave,
Let him have time of Time's help to despair,
Let him have time to live a loathed slave,
Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave,
And time to see one that by alms doth live
Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.


'Let him have time to see his friends his foes,
And merry fools to mock at him resort;
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short
His time of folly and his time of sport;
And ever let his unrecalling crime
Have time to wail th' abusing of his time.


'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad,
Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill!
At his own shadow let the thief run mad,
Himself himself seek every hour to kill!
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill;
For who so base would such an office have
As slanderous death's-man to so base a slave?


'The baser is he, coming from a king,
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate:
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing
That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate;
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
The moon being clouded presently is miss'd,
But little stars may hide them when they list.


'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire,
And unperceived fly with the filth away;
But if the like the snow-white swan desire,
The stain upon his silver down will stay.
Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day:
Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly,
But eagles gazed upon with every eye.


'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools!
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators!
Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools;
Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters;
To trembling clients be you mediators:
For me, I force not argument a straw,
Since that my case is past the help of law.


'In vain I rail at Opportunity,
At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night;
In vain I cavil with mine infamy,
In vain I spurn at my confirm'd despite:
This helpless smoke of words doth me no right.
The remedy indeed to do me good
Is to let forth my foul-defiled blood.


'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree?
Honour thyself to rid me of this shame:
For if I die, my honour lives in thee;
But if I live, thou livest in my defame:
Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame,
And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe,
Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.'


This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth,
To find some desperate instrument of death:
But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth
To make more vent for passage of her breath;
Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth
As smoke from AEtna, that in air consumes,
Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.


'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain
Some happy mean to end a hapless life.
I fear'd by Tarquin's falchion to be slain,
Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife:
But when I fear'd I was a loyal wife:
So am I now: O no, that cannot be;
Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.


'O, that is gone for which I sought to live,
And therefore now I need not fear to die.
To clear this spot by death, at least I give
A badge of fame to slander's livery;
A dying life to living infamy:
Poor helpless help, the treasure stol'n away,
To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!


'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know
The stained taste of violated troth;
I will not wrong thy true affection so,
To flatter thee with an infringed oath;
This bastard graff shall never come to growth:
He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute
That thou art doting father of his fruit.


'Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state:
But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought
Basely with gold, but stol'n from forth thy gate.
For me, I am the mistress of my fate,
And with my trespass never will dispense,
Till life to death acquit my forced offence.


'I will not poison thee with my attaint,
Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin'd excuses;
My sable ground of sin I will not paint,
To hide the truth of this false night's abuses:
My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices,
As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale,
Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.'


By this, lamenting Philomel had ended
The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow,
And solemn night with slow sad gait descended
To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow:
But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see,
And therefore still in night would cloister'd be.


Revealing day through every cranny spies,
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping;
To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes,
Why pry'st thou through my window? leave thy peeping:
Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping:
Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
For day hath nought to do what's done by night.'


Thus cavils she with every thing she sees:
True grief is fond and testy as a child,
Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees:
Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild;
Continuance tames the one; the other wild,
Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still,
With too much labour drowns for want of skill.


So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,
Holds disputation with each thing she views,
And to herself all sorrow doth compare;
No object but her passion's strength renews;
And as one shifts, another straight ensues:
Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;
Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords.


The little birds that tune their morning's joy
Make her moans mad with their sweet melody:
For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy;
Sad souls are slain in merry company;
Grief best is pleased with grief's society:
True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed
When with like semblance it is sympathized.


'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore;
He ten times pines that pines beholding food;
To see the salve doth make the wound ache more;
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good;
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood,
Who being stopp'd, the bounding banks o'erflows;
Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.


'You mocking-birds,' quoth she, 'your tunes entomb
Within your hollow-swelling feather'd breasts,
And in my hearing be you mute and dumb:
My restless discord loves no stops nor rests;
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests:
Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears;
Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.


'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment,
Make thy sad grove in my dishevell'd hair:
As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment,
So I at each sad strain will strain a tear,
And with deep groans the diapason bear;
For burden-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still,
While thou on Tereus descant'st better skill.


'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part,
To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I,
To imitate thee well, against my heart
Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye;
Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die.
These means, as frets upon an instrument,
Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.


'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day,
As shaming any eye should thee behold,
Some dark deep desert, seated from the way,
That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold,
Will we find out; and there we will unfold
To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds:
Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.'


As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze,
Wildly determining which way to fly,
Or one encompass'd with a winding maze,
That cannot tread the way out readily;
So with herself is she in mutiny,
To live or die which of the twain were better,
When life is shamed, and death reproach's debtor.


'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack, what were it,
But with my body my poor soul's pollution?
They that lose half with greater patience bear it
Than they whose whole is swallow'd in confusion.
That mother tries a merciless conclusion
Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one,
Will slay the other and be nurse to none.


'My body or my soul, which was the dearer,
When the one pure, the other made divine?
Whose love of either to myself was nearer,
When both were kept for heaven and Collatine?
Ay me! the bark peel'd from the lofty pine,
His leaves will wither and his sap decay;
So must my soul, her bark being peel'd away.


'Her house is sack'd, her quiet interrupted,
Her mansion batter'd by the enemy;
Her sacred temple spotted, spoil'd, corrupted,
Grossly engirt with daring infamy:
Then let it not be call'd impiety,
If in this blemish'd fort I make some hole
Through which I may convey this troubled soul.


'Yet die I will not till my Collatine
Have heard the cause of my untimely death;
That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine,
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath.
My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath,
Which by him tainted shall for him be spent,
And as his due writ in my testament.


'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife
That wounds my body so dishonoured.
'Tis honour to deprive dishonour'd life;
The one will live, the other being dead:
So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred;
For in my death I murder shameful scorn:
My shame so dead, mine honour is new-born.


'Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost,
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?
My resolution, love, shall be thy boast,
By whose example thou revenged mayest be.
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me:
Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe,
And for my sake serve thou false Tarquin so.


'This brief abridgement of my will I make:
My soul and body to the skies and ground;
My resolution, husband, do thou take;
Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound;
My shame be his that did my fame confound;
And all my fame that lives disbursed be
To those that live, and think no shame of me.


'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will;
How was I overseen that thou shalt see it!
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;
My life's foul deed, my life's fair end shall free it.
Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say 'So be it:'
Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee:
Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.'


This Plot of death when sadly she had laid,
And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,
With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid,
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies;
For fleet-wing'd duty with thought's feathers flies.
Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so
As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.


Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow,
With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty,
And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow,
For why her face wore sorrow's livery;
But durst not ask of her audaciously
Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so,
Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash'd with woe.


But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set,
Each flower moisten'd like a melting eye;
Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet
Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy
Of those fair suns set in her mistress' sky,
Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light,
Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.


A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,
Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling:
One justly weeps; the other takes in hand
No cause, but company, of her drops spilling:
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing;
Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts,
And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts.


For men have marble, women waxen, minds,
And therefore are they form'd as marble will;
The weak oppress'd, the impression of strange kinds
Is form'd in them by force, by fraud, or skill:
Then call them not the authors of their ill,
No more than wax shall be accounted evil
Wherein is stamp'd the semblance of a devil.


Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain,
Lays open all the little worms that creep;
In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain
Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep:
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep:
Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,
Poor women's faces are their own fault's books.


No man inveigh against the wither'd flower,
But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill'd:
Not that devour'd, but that which doth devour,
Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild
Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfill'd
With men's abuses: those proud lords, to blame,
Make weak-made women tenants to their shame.


The precedent whereof in Lucrece view,
Assail'd by night with circumstances strong
Of present death, and shame that might ensue
By that her death, to do her husband wrong:
Such danger to resistance did belong,
That dying fear through all her body spread;
And who cannot abuse a body dead?


By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining:
'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are
raining?
If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining,
Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood:
If tears could help, mine own would do me good.


'But tell me, girl, when went'--and there she stay'd
Till after a deep groan--'Tarquin from hence?'
'Madam, ere I was up,' replied the maid,
'The more to blame my sluggard negligence:
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense;
Myself was stirring ere the break of day,
And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away.


'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold,
She would request to know your heaviness.'
'O, peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told,
The repetition cannot make it less;
For more it is than I can well express:
And that deep torture may be call'd a hell
When more is felt than one hath power to tell.


'Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen:
Yet save that labour, for I have them here.
What should I say? One of my husband's men
Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear
A letter to my lord, my love, my dear;
Bid him with speed prepare to carry it;
The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.'


Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write,
First hovering o'er the paper with her quill:
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight;
What wit sets down is blotted straight with will;
This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill:
Much like a press of people at a door,
Throng her inventions, which shall go before.


At last she thus begins: 'Thou worthy lord
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,
Health to thy person! next vouchsafe t' afford--
If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see--
Some present speed to come and visit me.
So, I commend me from our house in grief:
My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.'


Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly.
By this short schedule Collatine may know
Her grief, but not her grief's true quality:
She dares not thereof make discovery,
Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse,
Ere she with blood had stain'd her stain'd excuse.


Besides, the life and feeling of her passion
She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her:
When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her
From that suspicion which the world might bear her.
To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter
With words, till action might become them better.


To see sad sights moves more than hear them told;
For then eye interprets to the ear
The heavy motion that it doth behold,
When every part a part of woe doth bear.
'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear:
Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords,
And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.


Her letter now is seal'd, and on it writ
'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.'
The post attends, and she delivers it,
Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast
As lagging fowls before the northern blast:
Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems:
Extremity still urgeth such extremes.


The homely villain court'sies to her low;
And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye
Receives the scroll without or yea or no,
And forth with bashful innocence doth hie.
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie
Imagine every eye beholds their blame;
For Lucrece thought he blush'd to her see shame:


When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect
Of spirit, Life, and bold audacity.
Such harmless creatures have a true respect
To talk in deeds, while others saucily
Promise more speed, but do it leisurely:
Even so this pattern of the worn-out age
Pawn'd honest looks, but laid no words to gage.


His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,
That two red fires in both their faces blazed;
She thought he blush'd, as knowing Tarquin's lust,
And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed;
Her earnest eye did make him more amazed:
The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish,
The more she thought he spied in her some blemish.


But long she thinks till he return again,
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone.
The weary time she cannot entertain,
For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, and groan:
So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan,
That she her plaints a little while doth stay,
Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.


At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece
Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy:
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece.
For Helen's rape the city to destroy,
Threatening cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy;
Which the conceited painter drew so proud,
As heaven, it seem'd, to kiss the turrets bow'd.


A thousand lamentable objects there,
In scorn of nature, art gave lifeless life:
Many a dry drop seem'd a weeping tear,
Shed for the slaughter'd husband by the wife:
The red blood reek'd, to show the painter's strife;
And dying eyes gleam'd forth their ashy lights,
Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.


There might you see the labouring pioner
Begrimed with sweat, and smeared all with dust;
And from the towers of Troy there would appear
The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust,
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust:
Such sweet observance in this work was had,
That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.


In great commanders grace and majesty
You might behold, triumphing in their faces;
In youth, quick bearing and dexterity;
Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces;
Which heartless peasants did so well resemble,
That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.


In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art
Of physiognomy might one behold!
The face of either cipher'd either's heart;
Their face their manners most expressly told:
In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigor roll'd;
But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent
Show'd deep regard and smiling government.


There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand,
As 'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight;
Making such sober action with his hand,
That it beguiled attention, charm'd the sight:
In speech, it seem'd, his beard, all silver white,
Wagg'd up and down, and from his lips did fly
Thin winding breath, which purl'd up to the sky.


About him were a press of gaping faces,
Which seem'd to swallow up his sound advice;
All jointly listening, but with several graces,
As if some mermaid did their ears entice,
Some high, some low, the painter was so nice;
The scalps of many, almost hid behind,
To jump up higher seem'd, to mock the mind.


Here one man's hand lean'd on another's head,
His nose being shadow'd by his neighbour's ear;
Here one being throng'd bears back, all boll'n and
red;
Another smother'd seems to pelt and swear;
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear,
As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words,
It seem'd they would debate with angry swords.


For much imaginary work was there;
Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,
That for Achilles' image stood his spear,
Griped in an armed hand; himself, behind,
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind:
A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
Stood for the whole to be imagined.


And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy
When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to
field,
Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield;
And to their hope they such odd action yield,
That through their light joy seemed to appear,
Like bright things stain'd, a kind of heavy fear.


And from the strand of Dardan, where they fought,
To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran,
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
With swelling ridges; and their ranks began
To break upon the galled shore, and than
Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks,
They join and shoot their foam at Simois' banks.


To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come,
To find a face where all distress is stell'd.
Many she sees where cares have carved some,
But none where all distress and dolour dwell'd,
Till she despairing Hecuba beheld,
Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes,
Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies.


In her the painter had anatomized
Time's ruin, beauty's wreck, and grim care's reign:
Her cheeks with chaps and wrinkles were disguised;
Of what she was no semblance did remain:
Her blue blood changed to black in every vein,
Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed,
Show'd life imprison'd in a body dead.


On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes,
And shapes her sorrow to the beldam's woes,
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries,
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes:
The painter was no god to lend her those;
And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,
To give her so much grief and not a tongue.


'Poor instrument,' quoth she,'without a sound,
I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue;
And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound,
And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong;
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long;
And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes
Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.


'Show me the strumpet that began this stir,
That with my nails her beauty I may tear.
Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur
This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear:
Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here;
And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye,
The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die.


'Why should the private pleasure of some one
Become the public plague of many moe?
Let sin, alone committed, light alone
Upon his head that hath transgressed so;
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe:
For one's offence why should so many fall,
To plague a private sin in general?


'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,
Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds,
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies,
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,
And one man's lust these many lives confounds:
Had doting Priam cheque'd his son's desire,
Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.'


Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes:
For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell,
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes;
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell:
So Lucrece, set a-work, sad tales doth tell
To pencill'd pensiveness and colour'd sorrow;
She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.


She throws her eyes about the painting round,
And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament.
At last she sees a wretched image bound,
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent:
His face, though full of cares, yet show'd content;
Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes,
So mild, that Patience seem'd to scorn his woes.


In him the painter labour'd with his skill
To hide deceit, and give the harmless show
An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still,
A brow unbent, that seem'd to welcome woe;
Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so
That blushing red no guilty instance gave,
Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.


But, like a constant and confirmed devil,
He entertain'd a show so seeming just,
And therein so ensconced his secret evil,
That jealousy itself could not mistrust
False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust
Into so bright a day such black-faced storms,
Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms.


The well-skill'd workman this mild image drew
For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story
The credulous old Priam after slew;
Whose words like wildfire burnt the shining glory
Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry,
And little stars shot from their fixed places,
When their glass fell wherein they view'd their faces.


This picture she advisedly perused,
And chid the painter for his wondrous skill,
Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abused;
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill:
And still on him she gazed; and gazing still,
Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,
That she concludes the picture was belied.


'It cannot be,' quoth she,'that so much guile'--
She would have said 'can lurk in such a look;'
But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while,
And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took:
'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook,
And turn'd it thus,' It cannot be, I find,
But such a face should bear a wicked mind.


'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted.
So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild,
As if with grief or travail he had fainted,
To me came Tarquin armed; so beguiled
With outward honesty, but yet defiled
With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish,
So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.


'Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes,
To see those borrow'd tears that Sinon sheds!
Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise?
For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds:
His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds;
Those round clear pearls of his, that move thy pity,
Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city.


'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell;
For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,
And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell;
These contraries such unity do hold,
Only to flatter fools and make them bold:
So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter,
That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.'


Here, all enraged, such passion her assails,
That patience is quite beaten from her breast.
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails,
Comparing him to that unhappy guest
Whose deed hath made herself herself detest:
At last she smilingly with this gives o'er;
'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.'


Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow,
And time doth weary time with her complaining.
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,
And both she thinks too long with her remaining:
Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining:
Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps,
And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.


Which all this time hath overslipp'd her thought,
That she with painted images hath spent;
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought
By deep surmise of others' detriment;
Losing her woes in shows of discontent.
It easeth some, though none it ever cured,
To think their dolour others have endured.


But now the mindful messenger, come back,
Brings home his lord and other company;
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black:
And round about her tear-stained eye
Blue circles stream'd; like rainbows in the sky:
These water-galls in her dim element
Foretell new storms to those already spent.


Which when her sad-beholding husband saw,
Amazedly in her sad face he stares:
Her eyes, though sod in tears, look'd red and raw,
Her lively colour kill'd with deadly cares.
He hath no power to ask her how she fares:
Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance,
Met far from home, wondering each other's chance.


At last he takes her by the bloodless hand,
And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event
Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand?
Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent?
Why art thou thus attired in discontent?
Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness,
And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.'


Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire,
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe:
At length address'd to answer his desire,
She modestly prepares to let them know
Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe;
While Collatine and his consorted lords
With sad attention long to hear her words.


And now this pale swan in her watery nest
Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending;
'Few words,' quoth she, 'Shall fit the trespass best,
Where no excuse can give the fault amending:
In me moe woes than words are now depending;
And my laments would be drawn out too long,
To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.


'Then be this all the task it hath to say
Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay
Where thou was wont to rest thy weary head;
And what wrong else may be imagined
By foul enforcement might be done to me,
From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free.


'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight,
With shining falchion in my chamber came
A creeping creature, with a flaming light,
And softly cried 'Awake, thou Roman dame,
And entertain my love; else lasting shame
On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
If thou my love's desire do contradict.


' 'For some hard-favour'd groom of thine,' quoth he,
'Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,
I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee
And swear I found you where you did fulfil
The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill
The lechers in their deed: this act will be
My fame and thy perpetual infamy.'


'With this, I did begin to start and cry;
And then against my heart he sets his sword,
Swearing, unless I took all patiently,
I should not live to speak another word;
So should my shame still rest upon record,
And never be forgot in mighty Rome
Th' adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.


'Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,
And far the weaker with so strong a fear:
My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak;
No rightful plea might plead for justice there:
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear
That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes;
And when the judge is robb'd the prisoner dies.


'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse!
Or at the least this refuge let me find;
Though my gross blood be stain'd with this abuse,
Immaculate and spotless is my mind;
That was not forced; that never was inclined
To accessary yieldings, but still pure
Doth in her poison'd closet yet endure.'


Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss,
With head declined, and voice damm'd up with woe,
With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across,
From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow
The grief away that stops his answer so:
But, wretched as he is, he strives in vain;
What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.


As through an arch the violent roaring tide
Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste,
Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride
Back to the strait that forced him on so fast;
In rage sent out, recall'd in rage, being past:
Even so his sighs, his sorrows, make a saw,
To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.


Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth,
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh:
'Dear lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth
Another power; no flood by raining slaketh.
My woe too sensible thy passion maketh
More feeling-painful: let it then suffice
To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.


'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so,
For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me:
Be suddenly revenged on my foe,
Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me
From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me
Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die;
For sparing justice feeds iniquity.


'But ere I name him, you fair lords,' quoth she,
Speaking to those that came with Collatine,
'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine;
For 'tis a meritorious fair design
To chase injustice with revengeful arms:
Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.'


At this request, with noble disposition
Each present lord began to promise aid,
As bound in knighthood to her imposition,
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray'd.
But she, that yet her sad task hath not said,
The protestation stops. 'O, speak, ' quoth she,
'How may this forced stain be wiped from me?


'What is the quality of mine offence,
Being constrain'd with dreadful circumstance?
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense,
My low-declined honour to advance?
May any terms acquit me from this chance?
The poison'd fountain clears itself again;
And why not I from this compelled stain?'


With this, they all at once began to say,
Her body's stain her mind untainted clears;
While with a joyless smile she turns away
The face, that map which deep impression bears
Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears.
'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame, hereafter living,
By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving.'


Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,
She throws forth Tarquin's name; 'He, he,' she says,
But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak;
Till after many accents and delays,
Untimely breathings, sick and short assays,
She utters this, 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he,
That guides this hand to give this wound to me.'


Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast
A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed:
That blow did that it from the deep unrest
Of that polluted prison where it breathed:
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeath'd
Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly
Life's lasting date from cancell'd destiny.


Stone-still, astonish'd with this deadly deed,
Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew;
Till Lucrece' father, that beholds her bleed,
Himself on her self-slaughter'd body threw;
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew
The murderous knife, and, as it left the place,
Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;


And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood
Circles her body in on every side,
Who, like a late-sack'd island, vastly stood
Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood.
Some of her blood still pure and red remain'd,
And some look'd black, and that false Tarquin stain'd.


About the mourning and congealed face
Of that black blood a watery rigol goes,
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place:
And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes,
Corrupted blood some watery token shows;
And blood untainted still doth red abide,
Blushing at that which is so putrified.


'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries,
'That life was mine which thou hast here deprived.
If in the child the father's image lies,
Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived?
Thou wast not to this end from me derived.
If children predecease progenitors,
We are their offspring, and they none of ours.


'Poor broken glass, I often did behold
In thy sweet semblance my old age new born;
But now that fresh fair mirror, dim and old,
Shows me a bare-boned death by time out-worn:
O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn,
And shivered all the beauty of my glass,
That I no more can see what once I was!


'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer,
If they surcease to be that should survive.
Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger
And leave the faltering feeble souls alive?
The old bees die, the young possess their hive:
Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again and see
Thy father die, and not thy father thee!


By this, starts Collatine as from a dream,
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place;
And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,
And counterfeits to die with her a space;
Till manly shame bids him possess his breath
And live to be revenged on her death.


The deep vexation of his inward soul
Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue;
Who, mad that sorrow should his use control,
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,
Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng
Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid,
That no man could distinguish what he said.


Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain,
But through his teeth, as if the name he tore.
This windy tempest, till it blow up rain,
Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more;
At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er:
Then son and father weep with equal strife
Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.


The one doth call her his, the other his,
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay.
The father says 'She's mine.' 'O, mine she is,'
Replies her husband: 'do not take away
My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say
He weeps for her, for she was only mine,
And only must be wail'd by Collatine.'


'O,' quoth Lucretius,' I did give that life
Which she too early and too late hath spill'd.'
'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife,
I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath kill'd.'
'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours fill'd
The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece' life,
Answer'd their cries, 'my daughter' and 'my wife.'


Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side,
Seeing such emulation in their woe,
Began to clothe his wit in state and pride,
Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show.
He with the Romans was esteemed so
As silly-jeering idiots are with kings,
For sportive words and uttering foolish things:


But now he throws that shallow habit by,
Wherein deep policy did him disguise;
And arm'd his long-hid wits advisedly,
To cheque the tears in Collatinus' eyes.
'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth be, 'arise:
Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool,
Now set thy long-experienced wit to school.


'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe?
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds?
Is it revenge to give thyself a blow
For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds?
Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds:
Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,
To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.


'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart
In such relenting dew of lamentations;
But kneel with me and help to bear thy part,
To rouse our Roman gods with invocations,
That they will suffer these abominations,
Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced,
By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased.


'Now, by the Capitol that we adore,
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain'd,
By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's
store,
By all our country rights in Rome maintain'd,
And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complain'd
Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,
We will revenge the death of this true wife.'


This said, he struck his hand upon his breast,
And kiss'd the fatal knife, to end his vow;
And to his protestation urged the rest,
Who, wondering at him, did his words allow:
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow;
And that deep vow, which Brutus made before,
He doth again repeat, and that they swore.


When they had sworn to this advised doom,
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence;
To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,
And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence:
Which being done with speedy diligence,
The Romans plausibly did give consent
To Tarquin's everlasting banishment.



ANIEL

Peter, didst ever see the like?


PETER

He kills her in her own humour.


Re-enter CURTIS


GRUMIO

Where is he?


CURTIS

In her chamber, making a sermon of continency to her;

And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,

Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,

And sits as one new-risen from a dream.

Away, away! for he is coming hither.


Exeunt


Re-enter PETRUCHIO


PETRUCHIO

Thus have I politicly begun my reign,

And 'tis my hope to end successfully.

My falcon now is sharp and passing empty;

And till she stoop she must not be full-gorged,

For then she never looks upon her lure.

Another way I have to man my haggard,

To make her come and know her keeper's call,

That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites

That bate and beat and will not be obedient.

She eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat;

Last night she slept not, nor to-night she shall not;

As with the meat, some undeserved fault

I'll find about the making of the bed;

And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,

This way the coverlet, another way the sheets:

Ay, and amid this hurly I intend

That all is done in reverend care of her;

And in conclusion she shall watch all night:

And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl

And with the clamour keep her still awake.

This is a way to kill a wife with kindness;

And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.

He that knows better how to tame a shrew,

Now let him speak: 'tis charity to show.


Exit

SCENE II. Padua. Before BAPTISTA'S house.

Enter TRANIO and HORTENSIO

TRANIO

Is't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca

Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?

I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.


HORTENSIO

Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,

Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.


Enter BIANCA and LUCENTIO


LUCENTIO

Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?


BIANCA

What, master, read you? first resolve me that.


LUCENTIO

I read that I profess, the Art to Love.


BIANCA

And may you prove, sir, master of your art!


LUCENTIO

While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!


HORTENSIO

Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray,

You that durst swear at your mistress Bianca

Loved none in the world so well as Lucentio.


TRANIO

O despiteful love! unconstant womankind!

I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.


HORTENSIO

Mistake no more: I am not Licio,

Nor a musician, as I seem to be;

But one that scorn to live in this disguise,

For such a one as leaves a gentleman,

And makes a god of such a cullion:

Know, sir, that I am call'd Hortensio.


TRANIO

Signior Hortensio, I have often heard

Of your entire affection to Bianca;

And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,

I will with you, if you be so contented,

Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.


HORTENSIO

See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,

Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow

Never to woo her no more, but do forswear her,

As one unworthy all the former favours

That I have fondly flatter'd her withal.


TRANIO

And here I take the unfeigned oath,

Never to marry with her though she would entreat:

Fie on her! see, how beastly she doth court him!


HORTENSIO

Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!

For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,

I will be married to a wealthy widow,

Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me

As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.

And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.

Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,

Shall win my love: and so I take my leave,

In resolution as I swore before.


Exit


TRANIO

Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace

As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!

Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,

And have forsworn you with Hortensio.


BIANCA

Tranio, you jest: but have you both forsworn me?


TRANIO

Mistress, we have.


LUCENTIO

                  Then we are rid of Licio.


TRANIO

I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,

That shall be wood and wedded in a day.


BIANCA

God give him joy!


TRANIO

Ay, and he'll tame her.


BIANCA

He says so, Tranio.


TRANIO

Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.


BIANCA

The taming-school! what, is there such a place?


TRANIO

Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master;

That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,

To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.


Enter BIONDELLO


BIONDELLO

O master, master, I have watch'd so long

That I am dog-weary: but at last I spied

An ancient angel coming down the hill,

Will serve the turn.


TRANIO

What is he, Biondello?


BIONDELLO

Master, a mercatante, or a pedant,

I know not what; but format in apparel,

In gait and countenance surely like a father.


LUCENTIO

And what of him, Tranio?


TRANIO

If he be credulous and trust my tale,

I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,

And give assurance to Baptista Minola,

As if he were the right Vincentio

Take in your love, and then let me alone.


Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA


Enter a Pedant


Pedant

God save you, sir!


TRANIO

                  And you, sir! you are welcome.

Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?


Pedant

Sir, at the farthest for a week or two:

But then up farther, and as for as Rome;

And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.


TRANIO

What countryman, I pray?


Pedant

Of Mantua.


TRANIO

Of Mantua, sir? marry, God forbid!

And come to Padua, careless of your life?


Pedant

My life, sir! how, I pray? for that goes hard.


TRANIO

'Tis death for any one in Mantua

To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?

Your ships are stay'd at Venice, and the duke,

For private quarrel 'twixt your duke and him,

Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly:

'Tis, marvel, but that you are but newly come,

You might have heard it else proclaim'd about.


Pedant

Alas! sir, it is worse for me than so;

For I have bills for money by exchange

From Florence and must here deliver them.


TRANIO

Well, sir, to do you courtesy,

This will I do, and this I will advise you:

First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?


Pedant

Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,

Pisa renowned for grave citizens.


TRANIO

Among them know you one Vincentio?


Pedant

I know him not, but I have heard of him;

A merchant of incomparable wealth.


TRANIO

He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,

In countenance somewhat doth resemble you.


BIONDELLO

[Aside]  As much as an apple doth an oyster,

and all one.


TRANIO

To save your life in this extremity,

This favour will I do you for his sake;

And think it not the worst of an your fortunes

That you are like to Sir Vincentio.

His name and credit shall you undertake,

And in my house you shall be friendly lodged:

Look that you take upon you as you should;

You understand me, sir: so shall you stay

Till you have done your business in the city:

If this be courtesy, sir, accept of it.


Pedant

O sir, I do; and will repute you ever

The patron of my life and liberty.


TRANIO

Then go with me to make the matter good.

This, by the way, I let you understand;

my father is here look'd for every day,

To pass assurance of a dower in marriage

'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here:

In all these circumstances I'll instruct you:

Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.


Exeunt

SCENE III. A room in PETRUCHIO'S house.

Enter KATHARINA and GRUMIO

GRUMIO

No, no, forsooth; I dare not for my life.


KATHARINA

The more my wrong, the more his spite appears:

What, did he marry me to famish me?

Beggars, that come unto my father's door,

Upon entreaty have a present aims;

If not, elsewhere they meet with charity:

But I, who never knew how to entreat,

Nor never needed that I should entreat,

Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,

With oath kept waking and with brawling fed:

And that which spites me more than all these wants,

He does it under name of perfect love;

As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,

'Twere deadly sickness or else present death.

I prithee go and get me some repast;

I care not what, so it be wholesome food.


GRUMIO

What say you to a neat's foot?


KATHARINA

'Tis passing good: I prithee let me have it.


GRUMIO

I fear it is too choleric a meat.

How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd?


KATHARINA

I like it well: good Grumio, fetch it me.


GRUMIO

I cannot tell; I fear 'tis choleric.

What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?


KATHARINA

A dish that I do love to feed upon.


GRUMIO

Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.


KATHARINA

Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.


GRUMIO

Nay then, I will not: you shall have the mustard,

Or else you get no beef of Grumio.


KATHARINA

Then both, or one, or any thing thou wilt.


GRUMIO

Why then, the mustard without the beef.


KATHARINA

Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,


Beats him

That feed'st me with the very name of meat:

Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you,

That triumph thus upon my misery!

Go, get thee gone, I say.


Enter PETRUCHIO and HORTENSIO with meat


PETRUCHIO

How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?


HORTENSIO

Mistress, what cheer?


KATHARINA

Faith, as cold as can be.


PETRUCHIO

Pluck up thy spirits; look cheerfully upon me.

Here love; thou see'st how diligent I am

To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee:

I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.

What, not a word? Nay, then thou lovest it not;

And all my pains is sorted to no proof.

Here, take away this dish.


KATHARINA

I pray you, let it stand.


PETRUCHIO

The poorest service is repaid with thanks;

And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.


KATHARINA

I thank you, sir.


HORTENSIO

Signior Petruchio, fie! you are to blame.

Come, mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.


PETRUCHIO

[Aside]  Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.

Much good do it unto thy gentle heart!

Kate, eat apace: and now, my honey love,

Will we return unto thy father's house

And revel it as bravely as the best,

With silken coats and caps and golden rings,

With ruffs and cuffs and fardingales and things;

With scarfs and fans and double change of bravery,

With amber bracelets, beads and all this knavery.

What, hast thou dined? The tailor stays thy leisure,

To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.


Enter Tailor

Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments;

Lay forth the gown.


Enter Haberdasher

What news with you, sir?


Haberdasher

Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.


PETRUCHIO

Why, this was moulded on a porringer;

A velvet dish: fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy:

Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,

A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap:

Away with it! come, let me have a bigger.


KATHARINA

I'll have no bigger: this doth fit the time,

And gentlewomen wear such caps as these


PETRUCHIO

When you are gentle, you shall have one too,

And not till then.


HORTENSIO

[Aside]  That will not be in haste.


KATHARINA

Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;

And speak I will; I am no child, no babe:

Your betters have endured me say my mind,

And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.

My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,

Or else my heart concealing it will break,

And rather than it shall, I will be free

Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.


PETRUCHIO

Why, thou say'st true; it is a paltry cap,

A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie:

I love thee well, in that thou likest it not.


KATHARINA

Love me or love me not, I like the cap;

And it I will have, or I will have none.


Exit Haberdasher


PETRUCHIO

Thy gown? why, ay: come, tailor, let us see't.

O mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here?

What's this? a sleeve? 'tis like a demi-cannon:

What, up and down, carved like an apple-tart?

Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,

Like to a censer in a barber's shop:

Why, what, i' devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?


HORTENSIO

[Aside]  I see she's like to have neither cap nor gown.


Tailor

You bid me make it orderly and well,

According to the fashion and the time.


PETRUCHIO

Marry, and did; but if you be remember'd,

I did not bid you mar it to the time.

Go, hop me over every kennel home,

For you shall hop without my custom, sir:

I'll none of it: hence! make your best of it.


KATHARINA

I never saw a better-fashion'd gown,

More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable:

Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.


PETRUCHIO

Why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.


Tailor

She says your worship means to make

a puppet of her.


PETRUCHIO

O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread,

thou thimble,

Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!

Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou!

Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?

Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant;

Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard

As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou livest!

I tell thee, I, that thou hast marr'd her gown.


Tailor

Your worship is deceived; the gown is made

Just as my master had direction:

Grumio gave order how it should be done.


GRUMIO

I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.


Tailor

But how did you desire it should be made?


GRUMIO

Marry, sir, with needle and thread.


Tailor

But did you not request to have it cut?


GRUMIO

Thou hast faced many things.


Tailor

I have.


GRUMIO

Face not me: thou hast braved many men; brave not

me; I will neither be faced nor braved. I say unto

thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown; but I did

not bid him cut it to pieces: ergo, thou liest.


Tailor

Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify


PETRUCHIO

Read it.


GRUMIO

The note lies in's throat, if he say I said so.


Tailor

[Reads]  'Imprimis, a loose-bodied gown:'


GRUMIO

Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in

the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom

of brown thread: I said a gown.


PETRUCHIO

Proceed.


Tailor

[Reads]  'With a small compassed cape:'


GRUMIO

I confess the cape.


Tailor

[Reads]  'With a trunk sleeve:'


GRUMIO

I confess two sleeves.


Tailor

[Reads]  'The sleeves curiously cut.'


PETRUCHIO

Ay, there's the villany.


GRUMIO

Error i' the bill, sir; error i' the bill.

I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and

sewed up again; and that I'll prove upon thee,

though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.


Tailor

This is true that I say: an I had thee

in place where, thou shouldst know it.


GRUMIO

I am for thee straight: take thou the

bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me.


HORTENSIO

God-a-mercy, Grumio! then he shall have no odds.


PETRUCHIO

Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.


GRUMIO

You are i' the right, sir: 'tis for my mistress.


PETRUCHIO

Go, take it up unto thy master's use.


GRUMIO

Villain, not for thy life: take up my mistress'

gown for thy master's use!


PETRUCHIO

Why, sir, what's your conceit in that?


GRUMIO

O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for:

Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!

O, fie, fie, fie!


PETRUCHIO

[Aside]  Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.

Go take it hence; be gone, and say no more.


HORTENSIO

Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow:

Take no unkindness of his hasty words:

Away! I say; commend me to thy master.


Exit Tailor


PETRUCHIO

Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your father's

Even in these honest mean habiliments:

Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor;

For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich;

And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,

So honour peereth in the meanest habit.

What is the jay more precious than the lark,

Because his fathers are more beautiful?

Or is the adder better than the eel,

Because his painted skin contents the eye?

O, no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse

For this poor furniture and mean array.

if thou account'st it shame. lay it on me;

And therefore frolic: we will hence forthwith,

To feast and sport us at thy father's house.

Go, call my men, and let us straight to him;

And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;

There will we mount, and thither walk on foot

Let's see; I think 'tis now some seven o'clock,

And well we may come there by dinner-time.


KATHARINA

I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two;

And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.


PETRUCHIO

It shall be seven ere I go to horse:

Look, what I speak, or do, or think to do,

You are still crossing it. Sirs, let't alone:

I will not go to-day; and ere I do,

It shall be what o'clock I say it is.


HORTENSIO

[Aside]  Why, so this gallant will command the sun.


Exeunt

SCENE IV. Padua. Before BAPTISTA'S house.

Enter TRANIO, and the Pedant dressed like VINCENTIO

TRANIO

Sir, this is the house: please it you that I call?


Pedant

Ay, what else? and but I be deceived

Signior Baptista may remember me,

Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,

Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.


TRANIO

'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,

With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.


Pedant

I warrant you.


Enter BIONDELLO

But, sir, here comes your boy;

'Twere good he were school'd.


TRANIO

Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,

Now do your duty throughly, I advise you:

Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.


BIONDELLO

Tut, fear not me.


TRANIO

But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?


BIONDELLO

I told him that your father was at Venice,

And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.


TRANIO

Thou'rt a tall fellow: hold thee that to drink.

Here comes Baptista: set your countenance, sir.


Enter BAPTISTA and LUCENTIO

Signior Baptista, you are happily met.


To the Pedant

Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of:

I pray you stand good father to me now,

Give me Bianca for my patrimony.


Pedant

Soft son!

Sir, by your leave: having come to Padua

To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio

Made me acquainted with a weighty cause

Of love between your daughter and himself:

And, for the good report I hear of you

And for the love he beareth to your daughter

And she to him, to stay him not too long,

I am content, in a good father's care,

To have him match'd; and if you please to like

No worse than I, upon some agreement

Me shall you find ready and willing

With one consent to have her so bestow'd;

For curious I cannot be with you,

Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.


BAPTISTA

Sir, pardon me in what I have to say:

Your plainness and your shortness please me well.

Right true it is, your son Lucentio here

Doth love my daughter and she loveth him,

Or both dissemble deeply their affections:

And therefore, if you say no more than this,

That like a father you will deal with him

And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,

The match is made, and all is done:

Your son shall have my daughter with consent.


TRANIO

I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best

We be affied and such assurance ta'en

As shall with either part's agreement stand?


BAPTISTA

Not in my house, Lucentio; for, you know,

Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants:

Besides, old Gremio is hearkening still;

And happily we might be interrupted.


TRANIO

Then at my lodging, an it like you:

There doth my father lie; and there, this night,

We'll pass the business privately and well.

Send for your daughter by your servant here:

My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.

The worst is this, that, at so slender warning,

You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.


BAPTISTA

It likes me well. Biondello, hie you home,

And bid Bianca make her ready straight;

And, if you will, tell what hath happened,

Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua,

And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.


BIONDELLO

I pray the gods she may with all my heart!


TRANIO

Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.


Exit BIONDELLO

Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?

Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer:

Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa.


BAPTISTA

I follow you.


Exeunt TRANIO, Pedant, and BAPTISTA


Re-enter BIONDELLO


BIONDELLO

Cambio!


LUCENTIO

What sayest thou, Biondello?


BIONDELLO

You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?


LUCENTIO

Biondello, what of that?


BIONDELLO

Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind, to

expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.


LUCENTIO

I pray thee, moralize them.


BIONDELLO

Then thus. Baptista is safe, talking with the

deceiving father of a deceitful son.


LUCENTIO

And what of him?


BIONDELLO

His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.


LUCENTIO

And then?


BIONDELLO

The old priest of Saint Luke's church is at your

command at all hours.


LUCENTIO

And what of all this?


BIONDELLO

I cannot tell; expect they are busied about a

counterfeit assurance: take you assurance of her,

'cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum:' to the

church; take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient

honest witnesses: If this be not that you look for,

I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell for

ever and a day.


LUCENTIO

Hearest thou, Biondello?


BIONDELLO

I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an

afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to

stuff a rabbit; and so may you, sir: and so, adieu,

sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint

Luke's, to bid the priest be ready to come against

you come with your appendix.


Exit


LUCENTIO

I may, and will, if she be so contented:

She will be pleased; then wherefore should I doubt?

Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her:

It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.


Exit

SCENE V. A public road.

Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, HORTENSIO, and Servants

PETRUCHIO

Come on, i' God's name; once more toward our father's.

Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!


KATHARINA

The moon! the sun: it is not moonlight now.


PETRUCHIO

I say it is the moon that shines so bright.


KATHARINA

I know it is the sun that shines so bright.


PETRUCHIO

Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself,

It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,

Or ere I journey to your father's house.

Go on, and fetch our horses back again.

Evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd!


HORTENSIO

Say as he says, or we shall never go.


KATHARINA

Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,

And be it moon, or sun, or what you please:

An if you please to call it a rush-candle,

Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.


PETRUCHIO

I say it is the moon.


KATHARINA

I know it is the moon.


PETRUCHIO

Nay, then you lie: it is the blessed sun.


KATHARINA

Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun:

But sun it is not, when you say it is not;

And the moon changes even as your mind.

What you will have it named, even that it is;

And so it shall be so for Katharina.


HORTENSIO

Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.


PETRUCHIO

Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,

And not unluckily against the bias.

But, soft! company is coming here.


Enter VINCENTIO


To VINCENTIO

Good morrow, gentle mistress: where away?

Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,

Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?

Such war of white and red within her cheeks!

What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,

As those two eyes become that heavenly face?

Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.

Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.


HORTENSIO

A' will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.


KATHARINA

Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,

Whither away, or where is thy abode?

Happy the parents of so fair a child;

Happier the man, whom favourable stars

Allot thee for his lovely bed-fellow!


PETRUCHIO

Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad:

This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, wither'd,

And not a maiden, as thou say'st he is.


KATHARINA

Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,

That have been so bedazzled with the sun

That everything I look on seemeth green:

Now I perceive thou art a reverend father;

Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.


PETRUCHIO

Do, good old grandsire; and withal make known

Which way thou travellest: if along with us,

We shall be joyful of thy company.


VINCENTIO

Fair sir, and you my merry mistress,

That with your strange encounter much amazed me,

My name is call'd Vincentio; my dwelling Pisa;

And bound I am to Padua; there to visit

A son of mine, which long I have not seen.


PETRUCHIO

What is his name?


VINCENTIO

                  Lucentio, gentle sir.


PETRUCHIO

Happily we met; the happier for thy son.

And now by law, as well as reverend age,

I may entitle thee my loving father:

The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,

Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,

Nor be grieved: she is of good esteem,

Her dowery wealthy, and of worthy birth;

Beside, so qualified as may beseem

The spouse of any noble gentleman.

Let me embrace with old Vincentio,

And wander we to see thy honest son,

Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.


VINCENTIO

But is it true? or else is it your pleasure,

Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest

Upon the company you overtake?


HORTENSIO

I do assure thee, father, so it is.


PETRUCHIO

Come, go along, and see the truth hereof;

For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.


Exeunt all but HORTENSIO


HORTENSIO

Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.

Have to my widow! and if she be froward,

Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.


Exit


ACT V
SCENE I. Padua. Before LUCENTIO'S house.

GREMIO discovered. Enter behind BIONDELLO, LUCENTIO, and BIANCA

BIONDELLO

Softly and swiftly, sir; for the priest is ready.


LUCENTIO

I fly, Biondello: but they may chance to need thee

at home; therefore leave us.


BIONDELLO

Nay, faith, I'll see the church o' your back; and

then come back to my master's as soon as I can.


Exeunt LUCENTIO, BIANCA, and BIONDELLO


GREMIO

I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.


Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, VINCENTIO, GRUMIO, with Attendants


PETRUCHIO

Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house:

My father's bears more toward the market-place;

Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.


VINCENTIO

You shall not choose but drink before you go:

I think I shall command your welcome here,

And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.


Knocks


GREMIO

They're busy within; you were best knock louder.


Pedant looks out of the window


Pedant

What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?


VINCENTIO

Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?


Pedant

He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.


VINCENTIO

What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two, to

make merry withal?


Pedant

Keep your hundred pounds to yourself: he shall

need none, so long as I live.


PETRUCHIO

Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.

Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances,

I pray you, tell Signior Lucentio that his father is

come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.


Pedant

Thou liest: his father is come from Padua and here

looking out at the window.


VINCENTIO

Art thou his father?


Pedant

Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may believe her.


PETRUCHIO

[To VINCENTIO]  Why, how now, gentleman! why, this

is flat knavery, to take upon you another man's name.


Pedant

Lay hands on the villain: I believe a' means to

cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.


Re-enter BIONDELLO


BIONDELLO

I have seen them in the church together: God send

'em good shipping! But who is here? mine old

master Vincentio! now we are undone and brought to nothing.


VINCENTIO

[Seeing BIONDELLO]

Come hither, crack-hemp.


BIONDELLO

Hope I may choose, sir.


VINCENTIO

Come hither, you rogue. What, have you forgot me?


BIONDELLO

Forgot you! no, sir: I could not forget you, for I

never saw you before in all my life.


VINCENTIO

What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see

thy master's father, Vincentio?


BIONDELLO

What, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir:

see where he looks out of the window.


VINCENTIO

Is't so, indeed.


Beats BIONDELLO


BIONDELLO

Help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.


Exit


Pedant

Help, son! help, Signior Baptista!


Exit from above


PETRUCHIO

Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside and see the end of

this controversy.


They retire


Re-enter Pedant below; TRANIO, BAPTISTA, and Servants


TRANIO

Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?


VINCENTIO

What am I, sir! nay, what are you, sir? O immortal

gods! O fine villain! A silken doublet! a velvet

hose! a scarlet cloak! and a copatain hat! O, I

am undone! I am undone! while I play the good

husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at

the university.


TRANIO

How now! what's the matter?


BAPTISTA

What, is the man lunatic?


TRANIO

Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your

habit, but your words show you a madman. Why, sir,

what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I

thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.


VINCENTIO

Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.


BAPTISTA

You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do

you think is his name?


VINCENTIO

His name! as if I knew not his name: I have brought

him up ever since he was three years old, and his

name is Tranio.


Pedant

Away, away, mad ass! his name is Lucentio and he is

mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.


VINCENTIO

Lucentio! O, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold

on him, I charge you, in the duke's name. O, my

son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?


TRANIO

Call forth an officer.


Enter one with an Officer

Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista,

I charge you see that he be forthcoming.


VINCENTIO

Carry me to the gaol!


GREMIO

Stay, officer: he shall not go to prison.


BAPTISTA

Talk not, Signior Gremio: I say he shall go to prison.


GREMIO

Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be

cony-catched in this business: I dare swear this

is the right Vincentio.


Pedant

Swear, if thou darest.


GREMIO

Nay, I dare not swear it.


TRANIO

Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.


GREMIO

Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.


BAPTISTA

Away with the dotard! to the gaol with him!


VINCENTIO

Thus strangers may be hailed and abused: O

monstrous villain!


Re-enter BIONDELLO, with LUCENTIO and BIANCA


BIONDELLO

O! we are spoiled and--yonder he is: deny him,

forswear him, or else we are all undone.


LUCENTIO

[Kneeling]  Pardon, sweet father.


VINCENTIO

Lives my sweet son?


Exeunt BIONDELLO, TRANIO, and Pedant, as fast as may be


BIANCA

Pardon, dear father.


BAPTISTA

How hast thou offended?

Where is Lucentio?


LUCENTIO

                  Here's Lucentio,

Right son to the right Vincentio;

That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,

While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.


GREMIO

Here's packing, with a witness to deceive us all!


VINCENTIO

Where is that damned villain Tranio,

That faced and braved me in this matter so?


BAPTISTA

Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?


BIANCA

Cambio is changed into Lucentio.


LUCENTIO

Love wrought these miracles. Bianca's love

Made me exchange my state with Tranio,

While he did bear my countenance in the town;

And happily I have arrived at the last

Unto the wished haven of my bliss.

What Tranio did, myself enforced him to;

Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.


VINCENTIO

I'll slit the villain's nose, that would have sent

me to the gaol.


BAPTISTA

But do you hear, sir? have you married my daughter

without asking my good will?


VINCENTIO

Fear not, Baptista; we will content you, go to: but

I will in, to be revenged for this villany.


Exit


BAPTISTA

And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.


Exit


LUCENTIO

Look not pale, Bianca; thy father will not frown.


Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA


GREMIO

My cake is dough; but I'll in among the rest,

Out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.


Exit


KATHARINA

Husband, let's follow, to see the end of this ado.


PETRUCHIO

First kiss me, Kate, and we will.


KATHARINA

What, in the midst of the street?


PETRUCHIO

What, art thou ashamed of me?


KATHARINA

No, sir, God forbid; but ashamed to kiss.


PETRUCHIO

Why, then let's home again. Come, sirrah, let's away.


KATHARINA

Nay, I will give thee a kiss: now pray thee, love, stay.


PETRUCHIO

Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate:

Better once than never, for never too late.


Exeunt

SCENE II. Padua. LUCENTIO'S house.

Enter BAPTISTA, VINCENTIO, GREMIO, the Pedant,  LUCENTIO, BIANCA, PETRUCHIO, KATHARINA, HORTENSIO,  and Widow, TRANIO, BIONDELLO, and GRUMIO the Serving-men with Tranio bringing in a banquet

LUCENTIO

At last, though long, our jarring notes agree:

And time it is, when raging war is done,

To smile at scapes and perils overblown.

My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,

While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.

Brother Petruchio, sister Katharina,

And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,

Feast with the best, and welcome to my house:

My banquet is to close our stomachs up,

After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down;

For now we sit to chat as well as eat.


PETRUCHIO

Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!


BAPTISTA

Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.


PETRUCHIO

Padua affords nothing but what is kind.


HORTENSIO

For both our sakes, I would that word were true.


PETRUCHIO

Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.


Widow

Then never trust me, if I be afeard.


PETRUCHIO

You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:

I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.


Widow

He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.


PETRUCHIO

Roundly replied.


KATHARINA

                  Mistress, how mean you that?


Widow

Thus I conceive by him.


PETRUCHIO

Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?


HORTENSIO

My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.


PETRUCHIO

Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.


KATHARINA

'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round:'

I pray you, tell me what you meant by that.


Widow

Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,

Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe:

And now you know my meaning,


KATHARINA

A very mean meaning.


Widow

Right, I mean you.


KATHARINA

And I am mean indeed, respecting you.


PETRUCHIO

To her, Kate!


HORTENSIO

To her, widow!


PETRUCHIO

A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.


HORTENSIO

That's my office.


PETRUCHIO

Spoke like an officer; ha' to thee, lad!


Drinks to HORTENSIO


BAPTISTA

How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?


GREMIO

Believe me, sir, they butt together well.


BIANCA

Head, and butt! an hasty-witted body

Would say your head and butt were head and horn.


VINCENTIO

Ay, mistress bride, hath that awaken'd you?


BIANCA

Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep again.


PETRUCHIO

Nay, that you shall not: since you have begun,

Have at you for a bitter jest or two!


BIANCA

Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush;

And then pursue me as you draw your bow.

You are welcome all.


Exeunt BIANCA, KATHARINA, and Widow


PETRUCHIO

She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio.

This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;

Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.


TRANIO

O, sir, Lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,

Which runs himself and catches for his master.


PETRUCHIO

A good swift simile, but something currish.


TRANIO

'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself:

'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.


BAPTISTA

O ho, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.


LUCENTIO

I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.


HORTENSIO

Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?


PETRUCHIO

A' has a little gall'd me, I confess;

And, as the jest did glance away from me,

'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.


BAPTISTA

Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,

I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.


PETRUCHIO

Well, I say no: and therefore for assurance

Let's each one send unto his wife;

And he whose wife is most obedient

To come at first when he doth send for her,

Shall win the wager which we will propose.


HORTENSIO

Content. What is the wager?


LUCENTIO

Twenty crowns.


PETRUCHIO

Twenty crowns!

I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,

But twenty times so much upon my wife.


LUCENTIO

A hundred then.


HORTENSIO

                  Content.


PETRUCHIO

A match! 'tis done.


HORTENSIO

Who shall begin?


LUCENTIO

                  That will I.

Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.


BIONDELLO

I go.


Exit


BAPTISTA

Son, I'll be your half, Bianca comes.


LUCENTIO

I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself.


Re-enter BIONDELLO

How now! what news?


BIONDELLO

Sir, my mistress sends you word

That she is busy and she cannot come.


PETRUCHIO

How! she is busy and she cannot come!

Is that an answer?


GREMIO

                  Ay, and a kind one too:

Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.


PETRUCHIO

I hope better.


HORTENSIO

Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife

To come to me forthwith.


Exit BIONDELLO


PETRUCHIO

O, ho! entreat her!

Nay, then she must needs come.


HORTENSIO

I am afraid, sir,

Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.


Re-enter BIONDELLO

Now, where's my wife?


BIONDELLO

She says you have some goodly jest in hand:

She will not come: she bids you come to her.


PETRUCHIO

Worse and worse; she will not come! O vile,

Intolerable, not to be endured!

Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress;

Say, I command her to come to me.


Exit GRUMIO


HORTENSIO

I know her answer.


PETRUCHIO

                  What?


HORTENSIO

She will not.


PETRUCHIO

The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.


BAPTISTA

Now, by my holidame, here comes Katharina!


Re-enter KATARINA


KATHARINA

What is your will, sir, that you send for me?


PETRUCHIO

Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife?


KATHARINA

They sit conferring by the parlor fire.


PETRUCHIO

Go fetch them hither: if they deny to come.

Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands:

Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.


Exit KATHARINA


LUCENTIO

Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.


HORTENSIO

And so it is: I wonder what it bodes.


PETRUCHIO

Marry, peace it bodes, and love and quiet life,

And awful rule and right supremacy;

And, to be short, what not, that's sweet and happy?


BAPTISTA

Now, fair befal thee, good Petruchio!

The wager thou hast won; and I will add

Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;

Another dowry to another daughter,

For she is changed, as she had never been.


PETRUCHIO

Nay, I will win my wager better yet

And show more sign of her obedience,

Her new-built virtue and obedience.

See where she comes and brings your froward wives

As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.


Re-enter KATHARINA, with BIANCA and Widow

Katharina, that cap of yours becomes you not:

Off with that bauble, throw it under-foot.


Widow

Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,

Till I be brought to such a silly pass!


BIANCA

Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?


LUCENTIO

I would your duty were as foolish too:

The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,

Hath cost me an hundred crowns since supper-time.


BIANCA

The more fool you, for laying on my duty.


PETRUCHIO

Katharina, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women

What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.


Widow

Come, come, you're mocking: we will have no telling.


PETRUCHIO

Come on, I say; and first begin with her.


Widow

She shall not.


PETRUCHIO

I say she shall: and first begin with her.


KATHARINA

Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,

And dart not scornful glances from those eyes,

To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor:

It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,

Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,

And in no sense is meet or amiable.

A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,

Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty;

And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty

Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.

Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,

Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,

And for thy maintenance commits his body

To painful labour both by sea and land,

To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,

Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe;

And craves no other tribute at thy hands

But love, fair looks and true obedience;

Too little payment for so great a debt.

Such duty as the subject owes the prince

Even such a woman oweth to her husband;

And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,

And not obedient to his honest will,

What is she but a foul contending rebel

And graceless traitor to her loving lord?

I am ashamed that women are so simple

To offer war where they should kneel for peace;

Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway,

When they are bound to serve, love and obey.

Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,

Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,

But that our soft conditions and our hearts

Should well agree with our external parts?

Come, come, you froward and unable worms!

My mind hath been as big as one of yours,

My heart as great, my reason haply more,

To bandy word for word and frown for frown;

But now I see our lances are but straws,

Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,

That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.

Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,

And place your hands below your husband's foot:

In token of which duty, if he please,

My hand is ready; may it do him ease.


PETRUCHIO

Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.


LUCENTIO

Well, go thy ways, old lad; for thou shalt ha't.


VINCENTIO

'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.


LUCENTIO

But a harsh hearing when women are froward.


PETRUCHIO

Come, Kate, we'll to bed.

We three are married, but you two are sped.


To LUCENTIO

'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white;

And, being a winner, God give you good night!


Exeunt PETRUCHIO and KATHARINA


HORTENSIO

Now, go thy ways; thou hast tamed a curst shrew.


LUCENTIO

'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.


Exeunt

wers leisure;

Like doth quit like, and MEASURE still FOR MEASURE.

Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested;

Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.

We do condemn thee to the very block

Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.

Away with him!


MARIANA

                  O my most gracious lord,

I hope you will not mock me with a husband.


DUKE VINCENTIO

It is your husband mock'd you with a husband.

Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,

I thought your marriage fit; else imputation,

For that he knew you, might reproach your life

And choke your good to come; for his possessions,

Although by confiscation they are ours,

We do instate and widow you withal,

To buy you a better husband.


MARIANA

O my dear lord,

I crave no other, nor no better man.


DUKE VINCENTIO

Never crave him; we are definitive.


MARIANA

Gentle my liege,--


Kneeling


DUKE VINCENTIO

                  You do but lose your labour.

Away with him to death!


To LUCIO

Now, sir, to you.


MARIANA

O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part;

Lend me your knees, and all my life to come

I'll lend you all my life to do you service.


DUKE VINCENTIO

Against all sense you do importune her:

Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,

Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,

And take her hence in horror.


MARIANA

Isabel,

Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me;

Hold up your hands, say nothing; I'll speak all.

They say, best men are moulded out of faults;

And, for the most, become much more the better

For being a little bad: so may my husband.

O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?


DUKE VINCENTIO

He dies for Claudio's death.


ISABELLA

Most bounteous sir,


Kneeling

Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,

As if my brother lived: I partly think

A due sincerity govern'd his deeds,

Till he did look on me: since it is so,

Let him not die. My brother had but justice,

In that he did the thing for which he died:

For Angelo,

His act did not o'ertake his bad intent,

And must be buried but as an intent

That perish'd by the way: thoughts are no subjects;

Intents but merely thoughts.


MARIANA

Merely, my lord.


DUKE VINCENTIO

Your suit's unprofitable; stand up, I say.

I have bethought me of another fault.

Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded

At an unusual hour?


Provost

It was commanded so.


DUKE VINCENTIO

Had you a special warrant for the deed?


Provost

No, my good lord; it was by private message.


DUKE VINCENTIO

For which I do discharge you of your office:

Give up your keys.


Provost

                  Pardon me, noble lord:

I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;

Yet did repent me, after more advice;

For testimony whereof, one in the prison,

That should by private order else have died,

I have reserved alive.


DUKE VINCENTIO

What's he?


Provost

His name is Barnardine.


DUKE VINCENTIO

I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.

Go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.


Exit Provost


ESCALUS

I am sorry, one so learned and so wise

As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd,

Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood.

And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.


ANGELO

I am sorry that such sorrow I procure:

And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart

That I crave death more willingly than mercy;

'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.


Re-enter Provost, with BARNARDINE, CLAUDIO muffled, and JULIET


DUKE VINCENTIO

Which is that Barnardine?


Provost

This, my lord.


DUKE VINCENTIO

There was a friar told me of this man.

Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul.

That apprehends no further than this world,

And squarest thy life according. Thou'rt condemn'd:

But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all;

And pray thee take this mercy to provide

For better times to come. Friar, advise him;

I leave him to your hand. What muffled fellow's that?


Provost

This is another prisoner that I saved.

Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;

As like almost to Claudio as himself.


Unmuffles CLAUDIO


DUKE VINCENTIO

[To ISABELLA]  If he be like your brother, for his sake

Is he pardon'd; and, for your lovely sake,

Give me your hand and say you will be mine.

He is my brother too: but fitter time for that.

By this Lord Angelo perceives he's safe;

Methinks I see a quickening in his eye.

Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well:

Look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours.

I find an apt remission in myself;

And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon.


To LUCIO

You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,

One all of luxury, an ass, a madman;

Wherein have I so deserved of you,

That you extol me thus?


LUCIO

'Faith, my lord. I spoke it but according to the

trick. If you will hang me for it, you may; but I

had rather it would please you I might be whipt.


DUKE VINCENTIO

Whipt first, sir, and hanged after.

Proclaim it, provost, round about the city.

Is any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow,

As I have heard him swear himself there's one

Whom he begot with child, let her appear,

And he shall marry her: the nuptial finish'd,

Let him be whipt and hang'd.


LUCIO

I beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.

Your highness said even now, I made you a duke:

good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.


DUKE VINCENTIO

Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.

Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal

Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison;

And see our pleasure herein executed.


LUCIO

Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,

whipping, and hanging.


DUKE VINCENTIO

Slandering a prince deserves it.


Exit Officers with LUCIO

She, Claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.

Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo:

I have confess'd her and I know her virtue.

Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness:

There's more behind that is more gratulate.

Thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy:

We shill employ thee in a worthier place.

Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home

The head of Ragozine for Claudio's:

The offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,

I have a motion much imports your good;

Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,

What's mine is yours and what is yours is mine.

So, bring us to our palace; where we'll show

What's yet behind, that's meet you all should know.


Exeunt

ork, I fear me.--Pray, your news?--

If Marcius should be join'd with Volscians,--


COMINIUS

If!

He is their god: he leads them like a thing

Made by some other deity than nature,

That shapes man better; and they follow him,

Against us brats, with no less confidence

Than boys pursuing summer butterflies,

Or butchers killing flies.


MENENIUS

You have made good work,

You and your apron-men; you that stood so up much

on the voice of occupation and

The breath of garlic-eaters!


COMINIUS

He will shake

Your Rome about your ears.


MENENIUS

As Hercules

Did shake down mellow fruit.

You have made fair work!


BRUTUS

But is this true, sir?


COMINIUS

Ay; and you'll look pale

Before you find it other. All the regions

Do smilingly revolt; and who resist

Are mock'd for valiant ignorance,

And perish constant fools. Who is't can blame him?

Your enemies and his find something in him.


MENENIUS

We are all undone, unless

The noble man have mercy.


COMINIUS

Who shall ask it?

The tribunes cannot do't for shame; the people

Deserve such pity of him as the wolf

Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they

Should say 'Be good to Rome,' they charged him even

As those should do that had deserved his hate,

And therein show'd like enemies.


MENENIUS

'Tis true:

If he were putting to my house the brand

That should consume it, I have not the face

To say 'Beseech you, cease.' You have made fair hands,

You and your crafts! you have crafted fair!


COMINIUS

You have brought

A trembling upon Rome, such as was never

So incapable of help.


Both Tribunes

Say not we brought it.


MENENIUS

How! Was it we? we loved him but, like beasts

And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,

Who did hoot him out o' the city.


COMINIUS

But I fear

They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,

The second name of men, obeys his points

As if he were his officer: desperation

Is all the policy, strength and defence,

That Rome can make against them.


Enter a troop of Citizens


MENENIUS

Here come the clusters.

And is Aufidius with him? You are they

That made the air unwholesome, when you cast

Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at

Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming;

And not a hair upon a soldier's head

Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs

As you threw caps up will he tumble down,

And pay you for your voices. 'Tis no matter;

if he could burn us all into one coal,

We have deserved it.


Citizens

Faith, we hear fearful news.


First Citizen

For mine own part,

When I said, banish him, I said 'twas pity.


Second Citizen

And so did I.


Third Citizen

And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very

many of us: that we did, we did for the best; and

though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet

it was against our will.


COMINIUS

Ye re goodly things, you voices!


MENENIUS

You have made

Good work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?


COMINIUS

O, ay, what else?


Exeunt COMINIUS and MENENIUS


SICINIUS

Go, masters, get you home; be not dismay'd:

These are a side that would be glad to have

This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,

And show no sign of fear.


First Citizen

The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let's home.

I ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished

him.


Second Citizen

So did we all. But, come, let's home.


Exeunt Citizens


BRUTUS

I do not like this news.


SICINIUS

Nor I.


BRUTUS

Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth

Would buy this for a lie!


SICINIUS

Pray, let us go.


Exeunt

SCENE VII. A camp, at a small distance from Rome.

Enter AUFIDIUS and his Lieutenant

AUFIDIUS

Do they still fly to the Roman?


Lieutenant

I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but

Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat,

Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;

And you are darken'd in this action, sir,

Even by your own.


AUFIDIUS

                  I cannot help it now,

Unless, by using means, I lame the foot

Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,

Even to my person, than I thought he would

When first I did embrace him: yet his nature

In that's no changeling; and I must excuse

What cannot be amended.


Lieutenant

Yet I wish, sir,--

I mean for your particular,--you had not

Join'd in commission with him; but either

Had borne the action of yourself, or else

To him had left it solely.


AUFIDIUS

I understand thee well; and be thou sure,

when he shall come to his account, he knows not

What I can urge against him. Although it seems,

And so he thinks, and is no less apparent

To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly.

And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,

Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon

As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone

That which shall break his neck or hazard mine,

Whene'er we come to our account.


Lieutenant

Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?


AUFIDIUS

All places yield to him ere he sits down;

And the nobility of Rome are his:

The senators and patricians love him too:

The tribunes are no soldiers; and their people

Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty

To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome

As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it

By sovereignty of nature. First he was

A noble servant to them; but he could not

Carry his honours even: whether 'twas pride,

Which out of daily fortune ever taints

The happy man; whether defect of judgment,

To fail in the disposing of those chances

Which he was lord of; or whether nature,

Not to be other than one thing, not moving

From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace

Even with the same austerity and garb

As he controll'd the war; but one of these--

As he hath spices of them all, not all,

For I dare so far free him--made him fear'd,

So hated, and so banish'd: but he has a merit,

To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues

Lie in the interpretation of the time:

And power, unto itself most commendable,

Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair

To extol what it hath done.

One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail;

Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.

Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,

Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.


Exeunt


ACT V
SCENE I. Rome. A public place.

Enter MENENIUS, COMINIUS, SICINIUS, BRUTUS, and others

MENENIUS

No, I'll not go: you hear what he hath said

Which was sometime his general; who loved him

In a most dear particular. He call'd me father:

But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him;

A mile before his tent fall down, and knee

The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd

To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.


COMINIUS

He would not seem to know me.


MENENIUS

Do you hear?


COMINIUS

Yet one time he did call me by my name:

I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops

That we have bled together. Coriolanus

He would not answer to: forbad all names;

He was a kind of nothing, titleless,

Till he had forged himself a name o' the fire

Of burning Rome.


MENENIUS

Why, so: you have made good work!

A pair of tribunes that have rack'd for Rome,

To make coals cheap,--a noble memory!


COMINIUS

I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon

When it was less expected: he replied,

It was a bare petition of a state

To one whom they had punish'd.


MENENIUS

Very well:

Could he say less?


COMINIUS

I offer'd to awaken his regard

For's private friends: his answer to me was,

He could not stay to pick them in a pile

Of noisome musty chaff: he said 'twas folly,

For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt,

And still to nose the offence.


MENENIUS

For one poor grain or two!

I am one of those; his mother, wife, his child,

And this brave fellow too, we are the grains:

You are the musty chaff; and you are smelt

Above the moon: we must be burnt for you.


SICINIUS

Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid

In this so never-needed help, yet do not

Upbraid's with our distress. But, sure, if you

Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,

More than the instant army we can make,

Might stop our countryman.


MENENIUS

No, I'll not meddle.


SICINIUS

Pray you, go to him.


MENENIUS

What should I do?


BRUTUS

Only make trial what your love can do

For Rome, towards Marcius.


MENENIUS

Well, and say that Marcius

Return me, as Cominius is return'd,

Unheard; what then?

But as a discontented friend, grief-shot

With his unkindness? say't be so?


SICINIUS

Yet your good will

must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure

As you intended well.


MENENIUS

I'll undertake 't:

I think he'll hear me. Yet, to bite his lip

And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me.

He was not taken well; he had not dined:

The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then

We pout upon the morning, are unapt

To give or to forgive; but when we have stuff'd

These and these conveyances of our blood

With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls

Than in our priest-like fasts: therefore I'll watch him

Till he be dieted to my request,

And then I'll set upon him.


BRUTUS

You know the very road into his kindness,

And cannot lose your way.


MENENIUS

Good faith, I'll prove him,

Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge

Of my success.


Exit


COMINIUS

                  He'll never hear him.


SICINIUS

Not?


COMINIUS

I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye

Red as 'twould burn Rome; and his injury

The gaoler to his pity. I kneel'd before him;

'Twas very faintly he said 'Rise;' dismiss'd me

Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do,

He sent in writing after me; what he would not,

Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions:

So that all hope is vain.

Unless his noble mother, and his wife;

Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him

For mercy to his country. Therefore, let's hence,

And with our fair entreaties haste them on.


Exeunt

SCENE II. Entrance of the Volscian camp before Rome.
Two Sentinels on guard.


Enter to them, MENENIUS


First Senator

Stay: whence are you?


Second Senator

Stand, and go back.


MENENIUS

You guard like men; 'tis well: but, by your leave,

I am an officer of state, and come

To speak with Coriolanus.


First Senator

From whence?


MENENIUS

From Rome.


First Senator

You may not pass, you must return: our general

Will no more hear from thence.


Second Senator

You'll see your Rome embraced with fire before

You'll speak with Coriolanus.


MENENIUS

Good my friends,

If you have heard your general talk of Rome,

And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,

My name hath touch'd your ears it is Menenius.


First Senator

Be it so; go back: the virtue of your name

Is not here passable.


MENENIUS

I tell thee, fellow,

The general is my lover: I have been

The book of his good acts, whence men have read

His name unparallel'd, haply amplified;

For I have ever verified my friends,

Of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity

Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes,

Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,

I have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise

Have almost stamp'd the leasing: therefore, fellow,

I must have leave to pass.


First Senator

Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his

behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you

should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous

to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.


MENENIUS

Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,

always factionary on the party of your general.


Second Senator

Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you

have, I am one that, telling true under him, must

say, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.


MENENIUS

Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not

speak with him till after dinner.


First Senator

You are a Roman, are you?


MENENIUS

I am, as thy general is.


First Senator

Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you,

when you have pushed out your gates the very

defender of them, and, in a violent popular

ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to

front his revenges with the easy groans of old

women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with

the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as

you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the

intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with

such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived;

therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your

execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn

you out of reprieve and pardon.


MENENIUS

Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would

use me with estimation.


Second Senator

Come, my captain knows you not.


MENENIUS

I mean, thy general.


First Senator

My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go; lest

I let forth your half-pint of blood; back,--that's

the utmost of your having: back.


MENENIUS

Nay, but, fellow, fellow,--


Enter CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS


CORIOLANUS

What's the matter?


MENENIUS

Now, you companion, I'll say an errand for you:

You shall know now that I am in estimation; you shall

perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from

my son Coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment

with him, if thou standest not i' the state of

hanging, or of some death more long in

spectatorship, and crueller in suffering; behold now

presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee.


To CORIOLANUS

The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy

particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than

thy old father Menenius does! O my son, my son!

thou art preparing fire for us; look thee, here's

water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to

thee; but being assured none but myself could move

thee, I have been blown out of your gates with

sighs; and conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy

petitionary countrymen. The good gods assuage thy

wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet

here,--this, who, like a block, hath denied my

access to thee.


CORIOLANUS

Away!


MENENIUS

How! away!


CORIOLANUS

Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs

Are servanted to others: though I owe

My revenge properly, my remission lies

In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,

Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather

Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone.

Mine ears against your suits are stronger than

Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,

Take this along; I writ it for thy sake


Gives a letter

And would have rent it. Another word, Menenius,

I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius,

Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st!


AUFIDIUS

You keep a constant temper.


Exeunt CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS


First Senator

Now, sir, is your name Menenius?


Second Senator

'Tis a spell, you see, of much  power: you know the

way home again.


First Senator

Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your

greatness back?


Second Senator

What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?


MENENIUS

I neither care for the world nor your general: for

such things as you, I can scarce think there's any,

ye're so slight. He that hath a will to die by

himself fears it not from another: let your general

do his worst. For you, be that you are, long; and

your misery increase with your age! I say to you,

as I was said to, Away!


Exit


First Senator

A noble fellow, I warrant him.


Second Senator

The worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, the

oak not to be wind-shaken.


Exeunt

SCENE III. The tent of Coriolanus.

Enter CORIOLANUS, AUFIDIUS, and others

CORIOLANUS

We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow

Set down our host. My partner in this action,

You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly

I have borne this business.


AUFIDIUS

Only their ends

You have respected; stopp'd your ears against

The general suit of Rome; never admitted

A private whisper, no, not with such friends

That thought them sure of you.


CORIOLANUS

This last old man,

Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome,

Loved me above the measure of a father;

Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge

Was to send him; for whose old love I have,

Though I show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd

The first conditions, which they did refuse

And cannot now accept; to grace him only

That thought he could do more, a very little

I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits,

Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter

Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this?


Shout within

Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow

In the same time 'tis made? I will not.


Enter in mourning habits, VIRGILIA, VOLUMNIA, leading young MARCIUS, VALERIA, and Attendants

My wife comes foremost; then the honour'd mould

Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand

The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection!

All bond and privilege of nature, break!

Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.

What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes,

Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not

Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows;

As if Olympus to a molehill should

In supplication nod: and my young boy

Hath an aspect of intercession, which

Great nature cries 'Deny not.' let the Volsces

Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I'll never

Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand,

As if a man were author of himself

And knew no other kin.


VIRGILIA

My lord and husband!


CORIOLANUS

These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.


VIRGILIA

The sorrow that delivers us thus changed

Makes you think so.


CORIOLANUS

Like a dull actor now,

I have forgot my part, and I am out,

Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,

Forgive my tyranny; but do not say

For that 'Forgive our Romans.' O, a kiss

Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!

Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss

I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip

Hath virgin'd it e'er since. You gods! I prate,

And the most noble mother of the world

Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth;


Kneels

Of thy deep duty more impression show

Than that of common sons.


VOLUMNIA

O, stand up blest!

Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint,

I kneel before thee; and unproperly

Show duty, as mistaken all this while

Between the child and parent.


Kneels


CORIOLANUS

What is this?

Your knees to me? to your corrected son?

Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach

Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds

Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun;

Murdering impossibility, to make

What cannot be, slight work.


VOLUMNIA

Thou art my warrior;

I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?


CORIOLANUS

The noble sister of Publicola,

The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle

That's curdied by the frost from purest snow

And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria!


VOLUMNIA

This is a poor epitome of yours,

Which by the interpretation of full time

May show like all yourself.


CORIOLANUS

The god of soldiers,

With the consent of supreme Jove, inform

Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou mayst prove

To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars

Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw,

And saving those that eye thee!


VOLUMNIA

Your knee, sirrah.


CORIOLANUS

That's my brave boy!


VOLUMNIA

Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself,

Are suitors to you.


CORIOLANUS

I beseech you, peace:

Or, if you'ld ask, remember this before:

The thing I have forsworn to grant may never

Be held by you denials. Do not bid me

Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate

Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not

Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not

To ally my rages and revenges with

Your colder reasons.


VOLUMNIA

O, no more, no more!

You have said you will not grant us any thing;

For we have nothing else to ask, but that

Which you deny already: yet we will ask;

That, if you fail in our request, the blame

May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.


CORIOLANUS

Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for we'll

Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?


VOLUMNIA

Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment

And state of bodies would bewray what life

We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself

How more unfortunate than all living women

Are we come hither: since that thy sight,

which should

Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance

with comforts,

Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow;

Making the mother, wife and child to see

The son, the husband and the father tearing

His country's bowels out. And to poor we

Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us

Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort

That all but we enjoy; for how can we,

Alas, how can we for our country pray.

Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,

Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose

The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,

Our comfort in the country. We must find

An evident calamity, though we had

Our wish, which side should win: for either thou

Must, as a foreign recreant, be led

With manacles thorough our streets, or else

triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin,

And bear the palm for having bravely shed

Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son,

I purpose not to wait on fortune till

These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee

Rather to show a noble grace to both parts

Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner

March to assault thy country than to tread--

Trust to't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb,

That brought thee to this world.


VIRGILIA

Ay, and mine,

That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name

Living to time.


Young MARCIUS

A' shall not tread on me;

I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.


CORIOLANUS

Not of a woman's tenderness to be,

Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.

I have sat too long.


Rising


VOLUMNIA

Nay, go not from us thus.

If it were so that our request did tend

To save the Romans, thereby to destroy

The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us,

As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit

Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces

May say 'This mercy we have show'd;' the Romans,

'This we received;' and each in either side

Give the all-hail to thee and cry 'Be blest

For making up this peace!' Thou know'st, great son,

The end of war's uncertain, but this certain,

That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit

Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name,

Whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses;

Whose chronicle thus writ: 'The man was noble,

But with his last attempt he wiped it out;

Destroy'd his country, and his name remains

To the ensuing age abhorr'd.' Speak to me, son:

Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour,

To imitate the graces of the gods;

To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air,

And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt

That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?

Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man

Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:

He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy:

Perhaps thy childishness will move him more

Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world

More bound to 's mother; yet here he lets me prate

Like one i' the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life

Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy,

When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,

Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home,

Loaden with honour. Say my request's unjust,

And spurn me back: but if it be not so,

Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee,

That thou restrain'st from me the duty which

To a mother's part belongs. He turns away:

Down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees.

To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride

Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end;

This is the last: so we will home to Rome,

And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold 's:

This boy, that cannot tell what he would have

But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship,

Does reason our petition with more strength

Than thou hast to deny 't. Come, let us go:

This fellow had a Volscian to his mother;

His wife is in Corioli and his child

Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch:

I am hush'd until our city be a-fire,

And then I'll speak a little.


He holds her by the hand, silent


CORIOLANUS

O mother, mother!

What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,

The gods look down, and this unnatural scene

They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O!

You have won a happy victory to Rome;

But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it,

Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd,

If not most mortal to him. But, let it come.

Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,

I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,

Were you in my stead, would you have heard

A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius?


AUFIDIUS

I was moved withal.


CORIOLANUS

I dare be sworn you were:

And, sir, it is no little thing to make

Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,

What peace you'll make, advise me: for my part,

I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you; and pray you,

Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!


AUFIDIUS

[Aside]  I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and

thy honour

At difference in thee: out of that I'll work

Myself a former fortune.


The Ladies make signs to CORIOLANUS


CORIOLANUS

Ay, by and by;


To VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA,  & c

But we will drink together; and you shall bear

A better witness back than words, which we,

On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd.

Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve

To have a temple built you: all the swords

In Italy, and her confederate arms,

Could not have made this peace.


Exeunt

SCENE IV. Rome. A public place.

Enter MENENIUS and SICINIUS

MENENIUS

See you yond coign o' the Capitol, yond

corner-stone?


SICINIUS

Why, what of that?


MENENIUS

If it be possible for you to displace it with your

little finger, there is some hope the ladies of

Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him.

But I say there is no hope in't: our throats are

sentenced and stay upon execution.


SICINIUS

Is't possible that so short a time can alter the

condition of a man!


MENENIUS

There is differency between a grub and a butterfly;

yet your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown

from man to dragon: he has wings; he's more than a

creeping thing.


SICINIUS

He loved his mother dearly.


MENENIUS

So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother

now than an eight-year-old horse. The tartness

of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he

moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before

his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet with

his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a

battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for

Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with

his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity

and a heaven to throne in.


SICINIUS

Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.


MENENIUS

I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his

mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy

in him than there is milk in a male tiger; that

shall our poor city find: and all this is long of

you.


SICINIUS

The gods be good unto us!


MENENIUS

No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto

us. When we banished him, we respected not them;

and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.


Enter a Messenger


Messenger

Sir, if you'ld save your life, fly to your house:

The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune

And hale him up and down, all swearing, if

The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,

They'll give him death by inches.


Enter a second Messenger


SICINIUS

What's the news?


Second Messenger

Good news, good news; the ladies have prevail'd,

The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone:

A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,

No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.


SICINIUS

Friend,

Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?


Second Messenger

As certain as I know the sun is fire:

Where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it?

Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide,

As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you!


Trumpets; hautboys; drums beat; all together

The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes,

Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans,

Make the sun dance. Hark you!


A shout within


MENENIUS

This is good news:

I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia

Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians,

A city full; of tribunes, such as you,

A sea and land full. You have pray'd well to-day:

This morning for ten thousand of your throats

I'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!


Music still, with shouts


SICINIUS

First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next,

Accept my thankfulness.


Second Messenger

Sir, we have all

Great cause to give great thanks.


SICINIUS

They are near the city?


Second Messenger

Almost at point to enter.


SICINIUS

We will meet them,

And help the joy.


Exeunt

SCENE V. The same. A street near the gate.

Enter two Senators with VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA,  VALERIA,  & c. passing over the stage, followed by Patricians and others

First Senator

Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!

Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,

And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them:

Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius,

Repeal him with the welcome of his mother;

Cry 'Welcome, ladies, welcome!'


All

Welcome, ladies, Welcome!


A flourish with drums and trumpets. Exeunt

SCENE VI. Antium. A public place.

Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS, with Attendants

AUFIDIUS

Go tell the lords o' the city I am here:

Deliver them this paper: having read it,

Bid them repair to the market place; where I,

Even in theirs and in the commons' ears,

Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse

The city ports by this hath enter'd and

Intends to appear before the people, hoping

To purge herself with words: dispatch.


Exeunt Attendants


Enter three or four Conspirators of AUFIDIUS' faction

Most welcome!


First Conspirator

How is it with our general?


AUFIDIUS

Even so

As with a man by his own alms empoison'd,

And with his charity slain.


Second Conspirator

Most noble sir,

If you do hold the same intent wherein

You wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you

Of your great danger.


AUFIDIUS

Sir, I cannot tell:

We must proceed as we do find the people.


Third Conspirator

The people will remain uncertain whilst

'Twixt you there's difference; but the fall of either

Makes the survivor heir of all.


AUFIDIUS

I know it;

And my pretext to strike at him admits

A good construction. I raised him, and I pawn'd

Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd,

He water'd his new plants with dews of flattery,

Seducing so my friends; and, to this end,

He bow'd his nature, never known before

But to be rough, unswayable and free.


Third Conspirator

Sir, his stoutness

When he did stand for consul, which he lost

By lack of stooping,--


AUFIDIUS

That I would have spoke of:

Being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth;

Presented to my knife his throat: I took him;

Made him joint-servant with me; gave him way

In all his own desires; nay, let him choose

Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,

My best and freshest men; served his designments

In mine own person; holp to reap the fame

Which he did end all his; and took some pride

To do myself this wrong: till, at the last,

I seem'd his follower, not partner, and

He waged me with his countenance, as if

I had been mercenary.


First Conspirator

So he did, my lord:

The army marvell'd at it, and, in the last,

When he had carried Rome and that we look'd

For no less spoil than glory,--


AUFIDIUS

There was it:

For which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him.

At a few drops of women's rheum, which are

As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour

Of our great action: therefore shall he die,

And I'll renew me in his fall. But, hark!


Drums and trumpets sound, with great shouts of the People


First Conspirator

Your native town you enter'd like a post,

And had no welcomes home: but he returns,

Splitting the air with noise.


Second Conspirator

And patient fools,

Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear

With giving him glory.


Third Conspirator

Therefore, at your vantage,

Ere he express himself, or move the people

With what he would say, let him feel your sword,

Which we will second. When he lies along,

After your way his tale pronounced shall bury

His reasons with his body.


AUFIDIUS

Say no more:

Here come the lords.


Enter the Lords of the city


All The Lords

You are most welcome home.


AUFIDIUS

I have not deserved it.

But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused

What I have written to you?


Lords

We have.


First Lord

And grieve to hear't.

What faults he made before the last, I think

Might have found easy fines: but there to end

Where he was to begin and give away

The benefit of our levies, answering us

With our own charge, making a treaty where

There was a yielding,--this admits no excuse.


AUFIDIUS

He approaches: you shall hear him.


Enter CORIOLANUS, marching with drum and colours; commoners being with him


CORIOLANUS

Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier,

No more infected with my country's love

Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting

Under your great command. You are to know

That prosperously I have attempted and

With bloody passage led your wars even to

The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home

Do more than counterpoise a full third part

The charges of the action. We have made peace

With no less honour to the Antiates

Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver,

Subscribed by the consuls and patricians,

Together with the seal o' the senate, what

We have compounded on.


AUFIDIUS

Read it not, noble lords;

But tell the traitor, in the high'st degree

He hath abused your powers.


CORIOLANUS

Traitor! how now!


AUFIDIUS

                  Ay, traitor, Marcius!


CORIOLANUS

Marcius!


AUFIDIUS

Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think

I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name

Coriolanus in Corioli?

You lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously

He has betray'd your business, and given up,

For certain drops of salt, your city Rome,

I say 'your city,' to his wife and mother;

Breaking his oath and resolution like

A twist of rotten silk, never admitting

Counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears

He whined and roar'd away your victory,

That pages blush'd at him and men of heart

Look'd wondering each at other.


CORIOLANUS

Hear'st thou, Mars?


AUFIDIUS

Name not the god, thou boy of tears!


CORIOLANUS

Ha!


AUFIDIUS

No more.


CORIOLANUS

Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart

Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave!

Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever

I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords,

Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion--

Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him; that

Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join

To thrust the lie unto him.


First Lord

Peace, both, and hear me speak.


CORIOLANUS

Cut me to pieces, Volsces; men and lads,

Stain all your edges on me. Boy! false hound!

If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there,

That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I

Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli:

Alone I did it. Boy!


AUFIDIUS

Why, noble lords,

Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,

Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,

'Fore your own eyes and ears?


All Conspirators

Let him die for't.


All The People

'Tear him to pieces.' 'Do it presently.' 'He kill'd

my son.' 'My daughter.' 'He killed my cousin

Marcus.' 'He killed my father.'


Second Lord

Peace, ho! no outrage: peace!

The man is noble and his fame folds-in

This orb o' the earth. His last offences to us

Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,

And trouble not the peace.


CORIOLANUS

O that I had him,

With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,

To use my lawful sword!


AUFIDIUS

Insolent villain!


All Conspirators

Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!


The Conspirators draw, and kill CORIOLANUS: AUFIDIUS stands on his body


Lords

Hold, hold, hold, hold!


AUFIDIUS

My noble masters, hear me speak.


First Lord

O Tullus,--


Second Lord

Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.


Third Lord

Tread not upon him. Masters all, be quiet;

Put up your swords.


AUFIDIUS

My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage,

Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger

Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice

That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours

To call me to your senate, I'll deliver

Myself your loyal servant, or endure

Your heaviest censure.


First Lord

Bear from hence his body;

And mourn you for him: let him be regarded

As the most noble corse that ever herald

Did follow to his urn.


Second Lord

His own impatience

Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.

Let's make the best of it.


AUFIDIUS

My rage is gone;

And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up.

Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers; I'll be one.

Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully:

Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he

Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one,

Which to this hour bewail the injury,

Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.


Exeunt, bearing the body of CORIOLANUS. A dead march sounded

